Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with
Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Aleksei Petrenko 1 2 Zhehui Huang 2 Tushar Kumar 2 Gaurav Sukhatme 2 Vladlen Koltun 1

arXiv:2006.11751v2 [cs.LG] 23 Jun 2020

Abstract
Increasing the scale of reinforcement learning
experiments has allowed researchers to achieve
unprecedented results in both training sophisticated agents for video games, and in sim-to-real
transfer for robotics. Typically such experiments
rely on large distributed systems and require expensive hardware setups, limiting wider access
to this exciting area of research. In this work
we aim to solve this problem by optimizing the
efficiency and resource utilization of reinforcement learning algorithms instead of relying on
distributed computation. We present the “Sample Factory”, a high-throughput training system
optimized for a single-machine setting. Our architecture combines a highly efficient, asynchronous,
GPU-based sampler with off-policy correction
techniques, allowing us to achieve throughput
higher than 105 environment frames/second on
non-trivial control problems in 3D without sacrificing sample efficiency. We extend Sample Factory to support self-play and population-based
training and apply these techniques to train highly
capable agents for a multiplayer first-person
shooter game. Github: https://github.com/
alex-petrenko/sample-factory

1. Introduction
Training agents in simulated environments is a cornerstone
of contemporary reinforcement learning research. Substantial progress has been made in recent years by applying
reinforcement learning methods to train agents in these fast
and efficient environments, whether it is to solve complex
computer games (Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2017; Jaderberg
et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019) or sophisticated robotic
control problems via sim-to-real transfer (Müller et al., 2018;
1
Intel Labs 2 University of Southern California. Correspondence
to: Aleksei Petrenko <petrenko@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 108, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Hwangbo et al., 2019; Molchanov et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020).
Despite major improvements in the sample efficiency of
modern learning methods, most of them remain notoriously
data-hungry. For the most part, the level of results in recent years has risen due to the increased scale of experiments, rather than the efficiency of learning. Billion-scale
experiments with complex environments are now relatively
commonplace (Horgan et al., 2018; Espeholt et al., 2018;
Kapturowski et al., 2019), and the most advanced efforts
consume trillions of environment transitions in a single training session (Berner et al., 2019).
To minimize the turnaround time of these large-scale experiments, the common approach is to use distributed supercomputing systems consisting of hundreds of individual machines (Berner et al., 2019). Here, we show that by optimizing the architecture and improving the resource utilization
of reinforcement learning algorithms, we can train agents on
billions of environment transitions even on a single compute
node. We present the “Sample Factory”, a high-throughput
training system optimized for a single-machine scenario.
Sample Factory, built around an Asynchronous Proximal
Policy Optimization (APPO) algorithm, is a reinforcement
learning architecture that allows us to aggressively parallelize the experience collection and achieve throughput as
high as 130000 FPS (environment frames per second) on a
single multi-core compute node with only one GPU. We describe theoretical and practical optimizations that allow us to
achieve extreme frame rates on widely available commodity
hardware.
We evaluate our algorithm on a set of challenging 3D environments and demonstrate how to leverage vast amounts of
simulated experience to train agents that reach high levels
of skill. We then extend Sample Factory to support self-play
and population-based training and apply these techniques to
train highly capable agents for a full multiplayer game of
Doom (Kempka et al., 2016).

2. Prior Work
The quest for performance and scalability has been ongoing since before the advent of deep RL (Li & Schuurmans,

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

2011). Higher throughput algorithms allow for faster iteration and wider hyperparameter sweeps for the same amount
of compute resources, and are therefore highly desirable.
The standard implementation of a policy gradient algorithm
is fairly simple. It involves a (possibly vectorized) sampler
that collects environment transitions from Nenvs ≥ 1 copies
of the environment for a fixed number of timesteps T . The
collected batch of experience – consisting of Nenvs ×T samples – is aggregated and an iteration of SGD is performed,
after which the experience can be collected again with an
updated policy. This method has acquired the name Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) in the literature (Beeching et al.,
2019). While it is straightforward to implement and can be
accelerated with batched action generation on the GPU, it
has significant disadvantages. The sampling process has to
halt when the actions for the next step are being calculated,
and during the backpropagation step. This leads to a significant under-utilization of system resources during training.
Other algorithms such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) are usually also implemented
in this synchronous A2C style (Dhariwal et al., 2017).
Addressing the shortcomings of the naive implementation,
the Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) (Mnih
et al., 2016) proposed a distributed scheme consisting of
a number of independent actors, each with its own copy
of the policy. Every actor is responsible for environment
simulation, action generation, and gradient calculation. The
gradients are asynchronously aggregated on a single parameter server, and actors query the updated copy of the model
after each collected trajectory.
GA3C (Babaeizadeh et al., 2017) recognized the potential
of using a GPU in an asynchronous implementation for
both action generation and learning. A separate learner
component is introduced, and trajectories of experience are
communicated between the actors and the learner instead
of parameter vectors. GA3C outperforms CPU-only A3C
by a significant margin, although the high communication
cost between CPU actors and GPU predictors prevents the
algorithm from reaching optimal performance.
IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) uses an architecture conceptually similar to GA3C, extended to support distributed
training. An efficient implementation of GPU batching for
action generation leads to increased throughput, with reported training frame rate of 24K FPS for a single machine
with 48 CPU cores, and up to 250K FPS on a cluster with
500 CPUs.
The need for ever larger-scale experiments has focused attention on high-throughput reinforcement learning in recent publications. Decentralized Distributed PPO (Wijmans
et al., 2020) optimizes the distributed policy gradient setup
for multi-GPU clusters and resource-intensive environments

by parallelizing the learners and significantly reducing the
network throughput required. Concurrent with this work,
SEED RL (Espeholt et al., 2019) improves upon the IMPALA architecture and achieves high throughput in both
single-machine and multi-node scenarios, although unlike
Sample Factory it focuses on more expensive hardware setups involving multiple accelerators.
Deep RL frameworks also provide high-throughput implementations of policy gradient algorithms. RLlib (Liang
et al., 2018), based on the distributed computation framework Ray (Moritz et al., 2018), and TorchBeast (Küttler
et al., 2019) provide optimized implementations of the IMPALA architecture. Rlpyt (Stooke & Abbeel, 2019) implements highly-efficient asynchronous GPU samplers that
share some ideas with our work, although currently it does
not include asynchronous policy gradient methods such as
IMPALA or APPO.
Methods such as APE-X (Horgan et al., 2018) and R2D2
(Kapturowski et al., 2019) demonstrate the great scalability
of off-policy RL. While off-policy algorithms exhibit stateof-the-art performance in domains such as Atari (Bellemare
et al., 2013), they may be difficult to extend to the full
complexity of more challenging problems (Vinyals et al.,
2019), since Q-functions may be hard to learn for large
multi-headed and autoregressive action spaces. In this work,
we focused on policy gradient methods, although there is
great potential in off-policy learning. Hybrid methods such
as LASER (Schmitt et al., 2019) promise to combine high
scalability, flexibility, and sample efficiency.

3. Sample Factory
Sample Factory is an architecture for high-throughput reinforcement learning on a single machine. When designing
the system we focused on making all key computations fully
asynchronous, as well as minimizing the latency and the
cost of communication between components, taking full
advantage of fast local messaging.
A typical reinforcement learning scenario involves three
major computational workloads: environment simulation,
model inference, and backpropagation. Our key motivation
was to build a system in which the slowest of three workloads never has to wait for any other processes to provide
the data necessary to perform the next computation, since
the overall throughput of the algorithm is ultimately defined
by the workload with the lowest throughput. In order to
minimize the amount of time processes spend waiting, we
need to guarantee that the new portion of the input is always
available, even before the next step of computation is about
to start. The system in which the most compute-intensive
workload never idles can reach the highest resource utilization, thereby approaching optimal performance.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning
CPU components

GPU components

Sampler
Rollout worker #1
Rollout worker #2
...

observations
actions

observations

Shared
memory

actions

Policy worker #1
...
Policy worker #M

Rollout worker #N

Shared
memory

full trajectories

Learner

policy updates

GPU
memory

Figure 1. Overview of the Sample Factory architecture. N parallel rollout workers simulate k environments each, collecting observations.
These observations are processed by M policy workers, which generate actions and new hidden states via an accelerated forward pass on
the GPU. Complete trajectories are sent from rollout workers to the learner. After the learner completes the backpropagation step, the
model parameters are updated in shared CUDA memory and immediately fetched by the policy workers.

3.1. High-level design

set of observations xt+1 and rewards rt+1 .

The desire to minimize the idle time for all key computations
motivates the high-level design of the system (Figure 1). We
associate each computational workload with one of three
dedicated types of components. These components communicate with each other using a fast protocol based on FIFO
queues and shared memory. The queueing mechanism provides the basis for continuous and asynchronous execution,
where the next computation step can be started immediately
as long as there is something in the queue to process. The
decision to assign each workload to a dedicated component type also allows us to parallelize them independently,
thereby achieving optimized resource balance. This is different from prior work (Mnih et al., 2016; Espeholt et al.,
2018), where a single system component, such as an actor,
typically has multiple responsibilities. The three types of
components involved are rollout workers, policy workers,
and learners.

Rollout workers save every environment transition to a trajectory buffer in shared memory. Once T environment steps
are simulated, the trajectory of observations, hidden states,
actions, and rewards τ = x1 , h1 , a1 , r1 , ..., xT , hT , aT , rT
becomes available to the learner. The learner continuously
processes batches of trajectories and updates the parameters
of the actor θπ and the critic θV . These parameter updates
are sent to the policy worker as soon as they are available,
which reduces the amount of experience collected by the previous version of the model, minimizing the average policy
lag. This completes one training iteration.

Rollout workers are solely responsible for environment simulation. Each rollout worker hosts k ≥ 1 environment instances and sequentially interacts with these environments,
collecting observations xt and rewards rt . Note that the rollout workers do not have their own copy of the policy, which
makes them very lightweight, allowing us to massively parallelize the experience collection on modern multi-core CPUs.
The observations xt and the hidden states of the agent ht
are then sent to the policy worker, which collects batches
of xt , ht from multiple rollout workers and calls the policy
π, parameterized by the neural network θπ to compute the
action distributions µ(at |xt , ht ), and the updated hidden
states ht+1 . The actions at are then sampled from the distributions µ, and along with ht+1 are communicated back to
the corresponding rollout worker. This rollout worker uses
the actions at to advance the simulation and collect the next

Parallelism. As mentioned previously, the rollout workers do not own a copy of the policy and therefore are essentially thin wrappers around the environment instances.
This allows them to be massively parallelized. Additionally, Sample Factory also parallelizes policy workers. This
can be achieved because all of the current trajectory data
(xt , ht , at , ...) is stored in shared tensors that are accessible
by all processes. This allows the policy workers themselves
to be stateless, and therefore consecutive trajectory steps
from a single environment can be easily processed by any
of them. In practical scenarios, 2 to 4 policy worker instances easily saturate the rollout workers with actions, and
together with a special sampler design (section 3.2) allow
us to eliminate this potential bottleneck.
The learner is the only component of which we run a single
copy, at least as long as single-policy training is concerned
(multi-policy training is discussed in section 3.5). We can,
however, utilize multiple accelerators on the learner through
data-parallel training and Hogwild-style parameter updates
(Recht et al., 2011). Together with large batch sizes typically required for stable training in complex environments,
this gives the learner sufficient throughput to match the ex-

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning
Rollout worker step



sampling we want k/2 > tinf /tenv , where tinf and tenv
are average inference and simulation time, respectively.

Policy worker step

a) GPU-accelerated batched sampling (k envs per iteration)

at

xt

3.3. Communication between components

at

xt

b) "Double-buffered" sampling (k/2 envs per iteration)

t

Figure 2. a) Batched sampling enables forward pass acceleration
on GPU, but rollout workers have to wait for actions before the
next environment step can be simulated, underutilizing the CPU.
b) Double-buffered sampling splits k environments on the rollout
worker into two groups, alternating between them during sampling,
which practically eliminates idle time on CPU workers.

perience collection rate, unless the computational graph is
highly non-trivial.
3.2. Sampling
Rollout workers and policy workers together form the sampler. The sampling subsystem most critically affects the
throughput of the RL algorithm, since it is often the bottleneck. We propose a specific way of implementing the
sampler that allows for optimal resource utilization through
minimizing the idle time on the rollout workers.
First, note that training and experience collection are decoupled, so new environment transitions can be collected
during the backpropagation step. There are no parameter
updates for the rollout workers either, since the job of action generation is off-loaded to the policy worker. However,
if not addressed, this still leaves the rollout workers waiting for the actions to be generated by policy workers and
transferred back through interprocess communication.
To alleviate this inefficiency we use Double-Buffered Sampling (Figure 2). Instead of storing only a single environment on the rollout worker, we instead store a vector of environments E1 , ..., Ek , where k is even for simplicity. We split
this vector into two groups E1 , ..., Ek/2 , Ek/2+1 , ..., Ek ,
and alternate between them as we go through the rollout.
While the first group of environments is being stepped
through, the actions for the second group are calculated
on the policy worker, and vice versa. With a fast enough
policy worker and a correctly tuned value for k we can completely mask the communication overhead and ensure full
utilization of the CPU cores during sampling, as illustrated
in Figure 2. For maximal performance with double-buffered

The key to unlocking the full potential of the local, singlemachine setup is to utilize fast communication mechanisms
between system components. As suggested by Figure 1,
there are four main pathways for information flow: twoway communication between rollout and policy workers,
transfer of complete trajectories to the learner, and transfer
of parameter updates from the learner to the policy worker.
For the first three interactions we use a mechanism based
on PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) shared memory tensors.
We note that most data structures used in an RL algorithm
can be represented as tensors of fixed shape, whether they
are trajectories, observations, or hidden states. Thus we
preallocate a sufficient number of tensors in system RAM.
Whenever a component needs to communicate, we copy the
data into the shared tensors, and send only the indices of
these tensors through FIFO queues, making messages tiny
compared to the overall amount of data transferred.
For the parameter updates we use memory sharing on the
GPU. Whenever a model update is required, the policy
worker simply copies the weights from the shared memory
to its local copy of the model.
Unlike many popular asynchronous and distributed implementations, we do not perform any kind of data serialization as a part of the communication protocol. At full
throttle, Sample Factory generates and consumes more
than 1 GB of data per second, and even the fastest serialization/deserialization mechanism would severely hinder
throughput.
3.4. Policy lag
Policy lag is an inherent property of asynchronous RL algorithms, a discrepancy between the policy that collected
the experience (behavior policy) and the target policy that
is learned from it. The existence of this discrepancy conditions the off-policy training regime. Off-policy learning
is known to be hard for policy gradient methods, in which
the model parameters are usually updated in the direction of
∇ log µ(as |xs )q(xs , as ), where q(xs , as ) is an estimate of
the policy state-action value. The bigger the policy lag, the
harder it is to correctly estimate this gradient using a set of
samples xs from the behavior policy. Empirically this gets
more difficult in learning problems that involve recurrent
policies, high-dimensional observations, and complex action spaces, in which even very similar policies are unlikely
to exhibit the same performance over a long trajectory.
Policy lag in an asynchronous RL method can be caused
either by acting in the environment using an old policy, or

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

collecting more trajectories from parallel environments in
one iteration than the learner can ingest in a single minibatch,
resulting in a portion of the experience becoming off-policy
by the time it is processed. We deal with the first issue by
immediately updating the model on policy workers, as soon
as new parameters become available. In Sample Factory the
parameter updates are cheap because the model is stored
in shared memory. A typical update takes less than 1 ms,
therefore we collect a very minimal amount of experience
with a policy that is different from the “master” copy.
It is however not necessarily possible to eliminate the second cause. It is beneficial in RL to collect training data from
many environment instances in parallel. Not only does this
decorrelate the experiences, it also allows us to utilize multicore CPUs, and with larger values for k (environments per
core), take full advantage of the double-buffered sampler.
In one “iteration” of experience collection, n rollout workers, each running k environments, will produce a total of
Niter = n × k × T samples. Since we update the policy
workers immediately after the learner step, potentially in the
middle of a trajectory, this leads to the earliest samples in
trajectories lagging behind Niter /Nbatch − 1 policy updates
on average, while the newest samples have no lag.
One can minimize the policy lag by decreasing T or increasing the minibatch size Nbatch . Both have implications for
learning. We generally want larger T , in the 25 –27 range
for backpropagation through time with recurrent policies,
and large minibatches may reduce sample efficiency. The
optimal batch size depends on the particular environment,
and larger batches were shown to be suitable for complex
problems with noisy gradients (McCandlish et al., 2018).
Additionally, there are two major classes of techniques designed to cope with off-policy learning. The first idea is to
apply trust region methods (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017):
by staying close to the behavior policy during learning, we
improve the quality of gradient estimates obtained using
samples from this policy. Another approach is to use importance sampling to correct the targets for the value function
V π to improve the approximation of the discounted sum of
rewards under the target policy (Harutyunyan et al., 2016).
IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) introduced the V-trace algorithm that uses truncated importance sampling weights
to correct the value targets. This was shown to improve the
stability and sample-efficiency of off-policy learning.
Both methods can be applied independently, as V-trace
corrects our training objective and the trust region guards
against destructive parameter updates. Thus we implemented both V-trace and PPO clipping in Sample Factory.
Whether to use these methods or not can be considered a
hyperparameter choice for a specific experiment. We find
that a combination of PPO clipping and V-trace works well
across tasks and yields stable training, therefore we decided

to use both methods in all experiments reported in the paper.
3.5. Multi-agent learning and self-play
Some of the most advanced recent results in deep RL have
been achieved through multi-agent reinforcement learning
and self-play (Bansal et al., 2018; Berner et al., 2019).
Agents trained via self-play are known to exhibit higher
levels of skill than their counterparts trained in fixed scenarios (Jaderberg et al., 2019). As policies improve during
self-play they generate a training environment of gradually
increasing complexity, naturally providing a curriculum for
the agents and allowing them to learn progressively more
sophisticated skills. Complex behaviors (e.g. cooperation
and tool use) have been shown to emerge in these training
scenarios (Baker et al., 2020).
There is also evidence that populations of agents training
together in multi-agent environments can avoid some failure modes experienced by regular self-play setups, such as
early convergence to local optima or overfitting. A diverse
training population can expose agents to a wider set of adversarial policies and produce more robust agents, reaching
higher levels of skill in complex tasks (Vinyals et al., 2019;
Jaderberg et al., 2019).
To unlock the full potential of our system we add support for
multi-agent environments, as well as training populations of
agents. Sample Factory naturally extends to multi-agent and
multi-policy learning. Since the rollout workers are mere
wrappers around the environment instances, they are totally
agnostic to the policies providing the actions. Therefore to
add more policies to the training process we simply spawn
more policy workers and more learners to support them. On
the rollout workers, for every agent in every multi-agent
environment we sample a random policy πi from the population at the beginning of each episode. The action requests
are then routed to their corresponding policy workers using
a set of FIFO queues, one for every πi . The populationbased setup that we use in this work is explained in more
detail in Section 4.

4. Experiments
4.1. Computational performance
Since increasing throughput and reducing experiment
turnaround time was the major motivation behind our work,
we start by investigating the computational aspects of system performance. We measure training frame rate on two
hardware systems that closely resemble commonly available
hardware setups in deep learning research labs. In our experiments, System #1 is a workstation-level PC with a 10-core
CPU and a GTX 1080 Ti GPU. System #2 is equipped with
a server-class 36-core CPU and a single RTX 2080 Ti.

FPS, frameskip = 4

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning
SampleFactory APPO
Atari throughput, System #1

50K
40K
30K
20K
10K

FPS, frameskip = 4

0
140K
120K
100K
80K
60K
40K
20K
0

SeedRL V-trace
60K
50K
40K
30K
20K
10K

100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Atari throughput, System #2

500

1000
1500
Num. environments

2000

0
140K
120K
100K
80K
60K
40K
20K
0

RLlib IMPALA
VizDoom throughput, System #1

100 200 300 400 500 600 700
VizDoom throughput, System #2

500

1000
1500
Num. environments

2000

DeepMind IMPALA
rlpyt PPO
DMLab throughput, System #1
16K
14K
12K
10K
8K
6K
4K
2K
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
DMLab throughput, System #2
50K
40K
30K
20K
10K
0

500

1000
1500
Num. environments

2000

Figure 3. Training throughput, measured in environment frames per second.

Figure 3 illustrates the training throughput in different configurations averaged over five minutes of continuous training
to account for performance fluctuations caused by episode
resets and other factors. Aside from showing the peak frame
rate we also demonstrate how the performance scales with
the increased number of environments sampled in parallel.
Sample Factory outperforms the baseline methods in most
of the training scenarios. Rlpyt and SeedRL follow closely,
matching Sample Factory performance in some configurations with a small number of environments. Both IMPALA
implementations fail to efficiently utilize the resources in a
single-machine deployment and hit performance bottlenecks
related to data serialization and transfer. Additionally, their
higher per-actor memory usage did not allow us to sample
as many environments in parallel. We omitted data points
for configurations that failed due to lack of memory or other
resources.
Average return

We compare performance of Sample Factory to other highthroughput policy gradient methods. Our first baseline is an
original version of the IMPALA algorithm (Espeholt et al.,
2018). The second baseline is IMPALA implemented in
RLlib (Liang et al., 2018), a high-performance distributed
RL framework. Third is a recent evolution of IMPALA from
DeepMind, SeedRL (Espeholt et al., 2019). Our final comparison is against a version of PPO with asynchronous sampling from the rlpyt framework (Stooke & Abbeel, 2019),
one of the fastest open-source RL implementations. We
use the same model architecture for all methods, a Con-

vNet with three convolutional layers, an RNN core, and
two fully-connected heads for the actor and the critic. Full
benchmarking details, including hardware configuration and
model architecture are provided in the supplementary files.

VizDoom, Find My Way Home

1.0

VizDoom, Defend the Center
20

0.5

10

0.0
0

Average return

As our testing environments we use three simulators: Atari
(Bellemare et al., 2013), VizDoom (Kempka et al., 2016),
and DeepMind Lab (Beattie et al., 2016). While that
Atari Learning Environment is a collection of 2D pixelbased arcade games, VizDoom and DMLab are based on
the rendering engines of immersive 3D first-person games,
Doom and Quake III. Both VizDoom and DMLab feature
first-person perspective, high-dimensional pixel observations, and rich configurable training scenarios. For our
throughput measurements in Atari we used the game Breakout, with grayscale frames in 84 × 84 resolution and 4framestack. In VizDoom we chose the environment Battle
described in section 4.3, with the observation resolution of
128×72×3. Finally, for DeepMind Lab we used the environment rooms_collect_good_objects from DMLab-30, also referred to as seekavoid_arena_01 (Espeholt et al., 2018). The
resolution for DeepMind Lab is kept at standard 96 × 72 × 3.
We follow the original implementation of IMPALA and use
a CPU-based software renderer for Lab environments. We
noticed that higher frame rate can be achieved when using
GPUs for environment rendering, especially on System #1
(see appendix). The reported throughput is measured in simulated environment steps per second, and in all three testing
scenarios we used traditional 4-frameskip, where the RL
algorithm receives a training sample every 4 environment
steps.

20M 40M 60M 80M 100M
Env. frames, skip=4

1.0

0

0

20M 40M 60M 80M 100M
Env. frames, skip=4

20

0.5

10

0.0
0

10 20 30 40 50
Training time, minutes

0

SampleFactory APPO
SeedRL V-trace

0

10 20 30 40 50
Training time, minutes

Figure 4. Direct comparison of wall-time performance. We show
the mean and standard deviation of four training runs for each
experiment.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Finally, we also analyzed the theoretical limits of RL training throughput. By stripping away all computationally expensive workloads from our system we can benchmark a
bare-bones sampler that just executes a random policy in
the environment as quickly as possible. The framerate of
this sampler gives us an upper bound on training performance, emulating an ideal RL algorithm with infinitely fast
action generation and learning. Table 1 shows that Sample
Factory gets significantly closer to this ideal performance
than the baselines. This experiment also shows that further optimization may be possible. For VizDoom, for example, the sampling rate is so high that the learner loop
completely saturates the GPU even with relatively shallow
models. Therefore performance can be further improved
by using multiple GPUs in data-parallel mode, or, alternatively, we can train small populations of agents, with learner
processes of different policies spread across GPUs.
4.2. DMLab-30 experiment
IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) showed that with sufficient
computational power it is possible to move beyond singletask RL and train one agent to solve a set of 30 diverse
pixel-based environments at once. Large-scale multi-task
training can facilitate the emergence of complex behaviors,
which motivates further investment in this research direction. To demonstrate the efficiency and flexibility of Sample
Atari, FPS

VizDoom, FPS

DMLab, FPS

Pure simulation

181740 (100%)

322907 (100%)

49679 (100%)

DeepMind IMPALA
RLlib IMPALA
SeedRL V-trace
rlpyt PPO

9961 (5.3%)
22440 (12.3%)
39726 (21.9%)
68880 (37.9%)

10708 (3.3%)
12391 (3.8%)
34428 (10.7%)
73544 (22.8%)

8782 (17.7%)
13932 (28.0%)
34773 (70.0%)
32948 (66.3%)

SampleFactory APPO

135893 (74.8%)

146551 (45.4%)

42149 (84.8%)

Table 1. Peak throughput of various RL algorithms on System #2
in environment frames per second and as percentage of the optimal
frame rate.

Factory we use our system to train a population of four
agents on DMLab-30 (Figure 5). While the original implementation relied on a distributed multi-server setup, our
agents were trained on a single 36-core 4-GPU machine.
Sample Factory reduces the computational requirements for
large-scale experiments and makes multi-task benchmarks
like DMLab-30 accessible to a wider research community.
To support future research, we also release a dataset of
pre-generated environment layouts for DMLab-30 which
contains a sufficient number of unique environments for
1010 -sample training and beyond. This dataset removes
the need to dynamically generate new layouts during training, which leads to a multifold increase in throughput on
DMLab-30.
Mean capped normalized score, %

Figure 4 demonstrates how the system throughput translates
into raw wall-time training performance. Sample Factory
and SeedRL implement similar asynchronous architectures
and demonstrate very close sample efficiency with equivalent sets of hyperparameters. We are therefore able to compare the training time directly. We trained agents on two
standard VizDoom environments. The plots demonstrate
a 4x advantage of Sample Factory over the state-of-the-art
baseline. Note that direct fair comparison with the fastest
baseline, rlpyt, is not possible since it does not implement
asynchronous training. In rlpyt the learner waits for all
workers to finish their rollouts before each iteration of SGD,
therefore increasing the number of sampled environments
also increases the training batch size, which significantly
affects sample efficiency. This is not the case for SeedRL
and Sample Factory, where a fixed batch size can be used
regardless of the number of environments simulated.

DMLab-30

60
50
40
30
20

Population mean
Population best
DeepMind IMPALA

10
0

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Env. frames, skip=4

0.8

1.0
1e10

Figure 5. Mean capped human-normalized training score (Espeholt
et al., 2018) for a single-machine DMLab-30 PBT run with Sample
Factory. (Compared to cluster-scale IMPALA deployment.)

4.3. VizDoom experiments
We further use Sample Factory to train agents on a set of
VizDoom environments. VizDoom provides challenging
scenarios with very high potential skill cap. It supports rapid
experience collection at fairly high input resolution. With
Sample Factory, we can train agents on billions of environment transitions in a matter of hours (see Figure 3). Despite
substantial effort put into improving VizDoom agents, including several years of AI competitions, the best reported
agents are still far from reaching expert-level human performance (Wydmuch et al., 2019).
We start by examining agent performance in a set of basic
environments included in the VizDoom distribution (Figure
6). Our algorithm matches or exceeds the performance reported in prior work on the majority of these tasks (Beeching
et al., 2019).
We then investigate the performance of Sample Factory
agents in four advanced single-player game modes: Battle,
Battle2, Duel, and Deathmatch. In Battle and Battle2, the
goal of the agent is to defeat adversaries in an enclosed maze
while maintaining health and ammunition. The maze in Battle2 is a lot more complex, with monsters and healthpacks
harder to find. The action set in the battle scenarios includes

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Average return

Find My Way Home
1.0

Deadly Corridor
1000

SampleFactory
A2C

0

200M
400M
Env. frames, skip=4

10

250
0

20

SampleFactory
A2C

0

200M
400M
Env. frames, skip=4

0

SampleFactory
A2C

0

200M
400M
Env. frames, skip=4

Health Gathering Supreme

30

10

10

20

5

5

0

SampleFactory
A2C

0

200M
400M
Env. frames, skip=4

0

SampleFactory
A2C

0

Defend the Line

40

15

15

500

0.0

Health Gathering
20

20

750
0.5

Defend the Center

10
0

200M
400M
Env. frames, skip=4

SampleFactory
A2C

0

200M
400M
Env. frames, skip=4

Figure 6. Training curves for standard VizDoom scenarios. We show the mean and standard deviation for ten independent experiments
conducted for each scenario.

For Duel and Deathmatch we extend the action space to also
include weapon switching and object interaction, which
allows the agent to open doors and call elevators. The
augmented action space fully replicates a set of controls
available to a human player. This brings the total number of
possible actions to ∼ 1.2 × 104 , which makes the policies
significantly more complex than those typically used for
Atari or DMLab. We find that better results can be achieved
in these environments when we repeat actions for two consecutive frames instead of the traditional four (Bellemare
et al., 2013), allowing the agents to develop precise movement and aim. In Duel and Deathmatch experiments we
use a 36-core PC with four GPUs to harness the full power
of Sample Factory and train a population of 8 agents with
population-based training. The final agents beat the in-game
bots on the highest difficulty in 100% of the matches in both
environments. In Deathmatch our agents defeat scripted opponents with an average score of 80.5 versus 12.6. In Duel
the average score is 34.7 to 3.6 frags per episode (Figure 8).
Self-play experiment. Using the networking capabilities
of VizDoom we created a Gym interface (Brockman et al.,
2016) for full multiplayer versions of Duel and Deathmatch
environments. In our implementation we start a separate
environment instance for every participating agent, after
which these environments establish network connections

We use this configuration to train a population of eight
agents playing against each other in 1v1 matches in a Duel
environment, using a setup similar to the “For The Win”
(FTW) agent described in (Jaderberg et al., 2019). As in
scenarios with scripted opponents, within one episode our
agents optimize environment reward based on game score
Battle
Kills per episode

We also introduce two new environments, Duel and Deathmatch, based on popular large multiplayer maps often chosen for competitive matches between human players. Singleplayer versions of these environments include scripted ingame opponents (bots) and can thus emulate a full Doom
multiplayer gameplay while retaining high single-player
simulation speed. We used in-game opponents that are included in standard Doom distributions. These bots are programmed by hand and have full access to the environment
state, unlike our agents, which only receive pixel observations and auxiliary info such as the current levels of health
and ammunition.

using UDP sockets. The simulation proceeds one step at a
time, synchronizing the state between the game instances
connected to the same match through local networking. This
environment allows us to evaluate the ultimate configuration
of Sample Factory, which includes both multi-agent and
population-based training.

50
40
30
20
10
0

Battle2

SampleFactory
DFP
DFP+CV

0

1
2
3
Env. frames, skip=4

4
1e9

20
15
10
5
0

SampleFactory
DFP

0

1
2
Env. frames, skip=4

3
1e9

Figure 7. VizDoom battle experiments. We show the mean and
standard deviation for four independent runs. Here as baselines we
provide scores reported for Direct Future Prediction (DFP) (Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2017), and a version of DFP with additional
input modalities such as depth and segmentation masks, produced
by a computer vision subsystem (Zhou et al., 2019). The latter
work only reports results for Battle.
Population mean

Population best

Deathmatch vs bots

80
Kills per episode

five independent discrete action heads for moving, aiming,
strafing, shooting, and sprinting. As shown in Figure 7,
our final scores on these environments significantly exceed
those reported in prior work (Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2017;
Zhou et al., 2019).

Avg. scripted bot

40

60

30

40

20

20

10

0

0.0

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Env. frames, skip=2

2.5
1e9

0

Best scripted bot

Duel vs bots

0.0

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Env. frames, skip=2

2.5
1e9

Figure 8. Populations of 8 agents trained in Deathmatch and Duel
scenarios. On the y-axis we report the average number of adversaries defeated in an 4-minute match. Shown are the means and
standard deviations within the population, as well as the performance of the best agent.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

and in-game events, including positive reinforcement for
scoring a kill or picking up a new weapon and penalties
for dying or losing armor. The agents are meta-optimized
through hyperparameter search via population-based training. The meta-objective in the self-play case is simply
winning, with a reward of +1 for outscoring the opponent
and 0 for any other outcome. This is different from our experiments with scripted opponents, where the final objective
for PBT was based on the total number of kills, because
agents quickly learned to win 100% of the matches against
scripted bots.
During population-based training we randomly mutate the
bottom 70% of the population every 5 × 106 environment
frames, altering hyperparameters such as learning rate, entropy coefficient, and reward weights. If the win rate of the
policy is less than half of the best-performing agent’s win
rate, we simply copy the model weights and hyperparameters from the best agent to the underperforming agent and
continue training.
As in our experiments with scripted opponents, each of
the eight agents was trained for 2.5 × 109 environment
frames on a single 36-core 4-GPU server, with the whole
population consuming ∼ 18 years of simulated experience.
We observe that despite a relatively small population size,
a diverse set of strategies emerges. We then simulated 100
matches between the self-play (FTW) agent and the agent
trained against scripted bots, selecting the agent with the
highest score from both populations. The results were 78
wins for the self-play agent, 3 losses, and 19 ties. This
demonstrates that population-based training resulted in more
robust policies (Figure 9), while the agent trained against
bots ultimately overfitted to a single opponent type. Video
recordings of our agents can be found at https://sites.
google.com/view/sample-factory.

5. Discussion
We presented an efficient high-throughput reinforcement
learning architecture that can process more than 105 environment frames per second on a single machine. We aim to
democratize deep RL and make it possible to train whole
populations of agents on billions of environment transitions
using widely available commodity hardware. We believe
this is an important area of research, as it can benefit any
project that leverages model-free RL. With our system architecture, researchers can iterate on their ideas faster, thus
accelerating progress in the field.
We also want to point out that maximizing training efficiency
on a single machine is equally important for distributed systems. In fact, Sample Factory can be used as a single node in
a distributed setup, where each machine has a sampler and
a learner. The learner computes gradients based on locally

Figure 9. Behavior of an agent trained via self-play. Top: Agents
tend to choose the chaingun to shoot at their opponents from
longer distance. Bottom: Agent opening a secret door to get a
more powerful weapon.

collected experience only, and learners on multiple nodes
can then synchronize their parameter updates after every
training iteration, akin to DD-PPO (Wijmans et al., 2020).
We showed the potential of our architecture by training
highly capable agents for a multiplayer configuration of the
immersive 3D game Doom. We chose the most challenging
scenario that exists in first-person shooter games – a duel.
Unlike multiplayer deathmatch, which tends to be chaotic,
the duel mode requires strategic reasoning, positioning, and
spatial awareness. Despite the fact that our agents were
able to convincingly defeat scripted in-game bots of the
highest difficulty, they are not yet at the level of expert
human players. One of the advantages human players have
in a duel is the ability to perceive sound. An expert human
player can hear the sounds produced by the opponent (ammo
pickups, shots fired, etc.) and can integrate these signals
to determine the opponent’s position. Recent work showed
that RL agents can beat humans in pixel-based 3D games
in limited scenarios (Jaderberg et al., 2019), but the task
of defeating expert competitors in a full game, as played
by humans, requires additional research, for example into
fusing information from multiple sensory systems.

References
Andrychowicz, M., Baker, B., Chociej, M., Józefowicz,
R., McGrew, B., Pachocki, J., Petron, A., Plappert, M.,
Powell, G., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Sidor, S., Tobin, J.,
Welinder, P., Weng, L., and Zaremba, W. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal
of Robotics Research, 39(1), 2020.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Babaeizadeh, M., Frosio, I., Tyree, S., Clemons, J., and
Kautz, J. Reinforcement learning through asynchronous
advantage actor-critic on a GPU. In ICLR, 2017.

Harutyunyan, A., Bellemare, M. G., Stepleton, T., and
Munos, R. Q(λ) with off-policy corrections. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, ALT, 2016.

Baker, B., Kanitscheider, I., Markov, T., Wu, Y., Powell, G.,
McGrew, B., and Mordatch, I. Emergent tool use from
multi-agent autocurricula. In ICLR, 2020.

Horgan, D., Quan, J., Budden, D., Barth-Maron, G., Hessel,
M., van Hasselt, H., and Silver, D. Distributed prioritized
experience replay. In ICLR, 2018.

Bansal, T., Pachocki, J., Sidor, S., Sutskever, I., and Mordatch, I. Emergent complexity via multi-agent competition. In ICLR, 2018.

Hwangbo, J., Lee, J., Dosovitskiy, A., Bellicoso, D., Tsounis, V., Koltun, V., and Hutter, M. Learning agile and
dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Science Robotics,
4(26), 2019.

Beattie, C., Leibo, J. Z., Teplyashin, D., Ward, T., Wainwright, M., Küttler, H., Lefrancq, A., Green, S., Valdés,
V., Sadik, A., Schrittwieser, J., Anderson, K., York, S.,
Cant, M., Cain, A., Bolton, A., Gaffney, S., King, H.,
Hassabis, D., Legg, S., and Petersen, S. DeepMind Lab.
CoRR, abs/1612.03801, 2016.
Beeching, E., Wolf, C., Dibangoye, J., and Simonin, O.
Deep reinforcement learning on a budget: 3D control and reasoning without a supercomputer. CoRR,
abs/1904.01806, 2019.
Bellemare, M. G., Naddaf, Y., Veness, J., and Bowling, M.
The arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform
for general agents. In IJCAI, 2013.
Berner, C., Brockman, G., Chan, B., Cheung, V., Debiak, P.,
Dennison, C., Farhi, D., Fischer, Q., Hashme, S., Hesse,
C., Józefowicz, R., Gray, S., Olsson, C., Pachocki, J.,
Petrov, M., de Oliveira Pinto, H. P., Raiman, J., Salimans,
T., Schlatter, J., Schneider, J., Sidor, S., Sutskever, I.,
Tang, J., Wolski, F., and Zhang, S. Dota 2 with large scale
deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1912.06680,
2019.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J.,
Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. OpenAI Gym.
CoRR, abs/1606.01540, 2016.
Dhariwal, P., Hesse, C., Klimov, O., Nichol, A., Plappert,
M., Radford, A., Schulman, J., Sidor, S., Wu, Y., and
Zhokhov, P. OpenAI baselines. https://github.
com/openai/baselines, 2017.

Jaderberg, M., Czarnecki, W. M., Dunning, I., Marris, L.,
Lever, G., Castañeda, A. G., Beattie, C., Rabinowitz,
N. C., Morcos, A. S., Ruderman, A., Sonnerat, N., Green,
T., Deason, L., Leibo, J. Z., Silver, D., Hassabis, D.,
Kavukcuoglu, K., and Graepel, T. Human-level performance in 3D multiplayer games with population-based
reinforcement learning. Science, 364(6443), 2019.
Kapturowski, S., Ostrovski, G., Quan, J., Munos, R., and
Dabney, W. Recurrent experience replay in distributed
reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2019.
Kempka, M., Wydmuch, M., Runc, G., Toczek, J., and
Jaskowski, W. Vizdoom: A Doom-based AI research
platform for visual reinforcement learning. In IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games, 2016.
Küttler, H., Nardelli, N., Lavril, T., Selvatici, M., Sivakumar, V., Rocktäschel, T., and Grefenstette, E. TorchBeast: A PyTorch platform for distributed RL. CoRR,
abs/1910.03552, 2019.
Li, Y. and Schuurmans, D. MapReduce for parallel reinforcement learning. In European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning, 2011.
Liang, E., Liaw, R., Nishihara, R., Moritz, P., Fox, R., Goldberg, K., Gonzalez, J., Jordan, M. I., and Stoica, I. RLlib:
Abstractions for distributed reinforcement learning. In
ICML, 2018.

Dosovitskiy, A. and Koltun, V. Learning to act by predicting
the future. In ICLR, 2017.

McCandlish, S., Kaplan, J., Amodei, D., et al. An empirical
model of large-batch training. CoRR, abs/1812.06162,
2018.

Espeholt, L., Soyer, H., Munos, R., Simonyan, K., Mnih, V.,
Ward, T., Doron, Y., Firoiu, V., Harley, T., Dunning, I.,
Legg, S., and Kavukcuoglu, K. IMPALA: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures. In ICML, 2018.

Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap,
T. P., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
ICML, 2016.

Espeholt, L., Marinier, R., Stanczyk, P., Wang, K.,
and Michalski, M. SEED RL: Scalable and efficient deep-rl with accelerated central inference. CoRR,
abs/1910.06591, 2019.

Molchanov, A., Chen, T., Hönig, W., Preiss, J. A., Ayanian,
N., and Sukhatme, G. S. Sim-to-(multi)-real: Transfer of
low-level robust control policies to multiple quadrotors.
In IROS, 2019.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Moritz, P., Nishihara, R., Wang, S., Tumanov, A., Liaw, R.,
Liang, E., Elibol, M., Yang, Z., Paul, W., Jordan, M. I.,
and Stoica, I. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging
AI applications. In USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation, 2018.
Müller, M., Dosovitskiy, A., Ghanem, B., and Koltun, V.
Driving policy transfer via modularity and abstraction. In
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2018.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J.,
Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga,
L., Desmaison, A., Köpf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang,
L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. PyTorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library. In Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Recht, B., Ré, C., Wright, S. J., and Niu, F. Hogwild: A lockfree approach to parallelizing stochastic gradient descent.
In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2011.
Schmitt, S., Hessel, M., and Simonyan, K. Off-policy
actor-critic with shared experience replay. CoRR,
abs/1909.11583, 2019.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M. I., and
Moritz, P. Trust region policy optimization. In ICML,
2015.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Stooke, A. and Abbeel, P. rlpyt: A research code base
for deep reinforcement learning in PyTorch. CoRR,
abs/1909.01500, 2019.
Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., Mathieu, M.,
Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D. H., Powell, R., Ewalds,
T., Georgiev, P., et al. Grandmaster level in StarCraft II
using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575
(7782), 2019.
Wijmans, E., Kadian, A., Morcos, A., Lee, S., Essa, I.,
Parikh, D., Savva, M., and Batra, D. DD-PPO: Learning
near-perfect PointGoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames.
In ICLR, 2020.
Wydmuch, M., Kempka, M., and Jaskowski, W. Vizdoom
competitions: Playing Doom from pixels. IEEE Transactions on Games, 11(3), 2019.
Zhou, B., Krähenbühl, P., and Koltun, V. Does computer
vision matter for action? Science Robotics, 4(30), 2019.

Supplementary Material

A. Experimental Details
A.1. Performance analysis
In this section, we provide details of the experimental setup used in our performance benchmarks. One of the goals of our
experiments was to compare the performance of different asynchronous RL algorithms "apples to apples", i.e. where all the
details that influence throughput are exactly the same for all methods we compare. This includes hardware configuration,
simulated environments and their settings (e.g. observation resolution), model size and architecture, and the number of
environment instances sampled in parallel.
A.1.1. H ARDWARE CONFIGURATION
We focused on commodity hardware often used for deep learning experimentation. Systems #1 and #2 were used for
performance benchmarks. System #3 is similar to System #2, except with four accelerators instead of one. We used
System #3 for our large-scale experiments with self-play and population-based training. See Table A.1 for details.
System #1

System #2

System #3

Intel Core i9-7900X
3.30 GHz
10
20

2 x Intel Xeon Gold 6154
3.00 GHz
36
72

2 x Intel Xeon Gold 6154
3.00 GHz
36
72

128 GB DDR4

256 GB DDR4

256 GB DDR4

GPUs
GPU memory

1 x NVidia GTX 1080Ti
11GB GDDR5X

1 x NVidia RTX 2080Ti
11GB GDDR6

4 x NVidia RTX 2080Ti
11GB GDDR6

OS
GPU drivers

Ubuntu 18.04 64-bit
NVidia 440.44

Ubuntu 18.04 64-bit
NVidia 418.40

Ubuntu 18.04 64-bit
NVidia 418.40

Processor
Base frequency
Physical cores
Logical cores
RAM

Table A.1. Hardware setups used for profiling and performance measurements (Systems #1 and #2) and for large-scale experiments with
self-play and PBT (System #3).

A.1.2. E NVIRONMENTS
We used three reinforcement learning domains for benchmarking: Atari, VizDoom, and DeepMind Lab. For Atari we simply
chose Breakout with 4-framestack, although other environments exhibit almost identical throughput. The VizDoom scenario
we selected is a simplified version of Battle with a single discrete action head and the input space including only the pixel
observations (no auxiliary game info). Most of the frameworks we tested do not support complex action and observation
spaces, so this simplification allowed us to use the exact same version of the environment for all of the evaluated algorithms
without major code modifications.
We chose rooms_collect_good_objects_train from DMLab-30 as our benchmark environment for DeepMind Lab. This
environment is also referred to as seekavoid_arena_01 in prior work (Espeholt et al., 2018). Just like the VizDoom scenario,
this environment has pixel-based observations and a simple discrete action space.
In DeepMind Lab some environment states can be significantly harder to render, and therefore the simulation time depends
on the behavior of the agent, e.g. as the agent learns to explore the environment the simulation can slow down or speed up as
the distribution of visited states changes. To eliminate this potential source of variance in throughput we ignore the action
distribution provided by the policy and sample actions randomly instead in our performance measurements for DMLab.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

This way we can measure only the throughput, disentangled from the learning performance. Note that using the random
policy for acting does not change the amount of computation done by the algorithm. We collect and process the experience
in the exact same way, only the actions sampled from the policy are replaced by random actions on the actors.
VizDoom environments are rendered with native resolution of 160 × 120 × 3 which is downsampled to 128 × 72 × 3. For
DMLab the observation resolution is 96 × 72 × 3. For VizDoom and DMLab we used 4-frameskip and no framestacking.
Atari frames are rendered in 210×160×3 and downsampled to 84×84 greyscale images. For Atari we used 4-frameskip and
4-framestack in all measurements, although higher overall throughput can be achieved without frame stacking. Following
(Espeholt et al., 2018) and (Espeholt et al., 2019) we report the throughput of all algorithms measured in environment frames
per second, i.e. a number of simulated environment transitions, or, in our case, 4× the number of samples processed by the
learner per second.
A.1.3. M ODEL ARCHITECTURES
In all our performance benchmarks we used the same convolutional neural network to parameterize the actor and the critic,
which is similar to model architectures used in prior work (Mnih et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018). In our implementation
the 3-layer convolutional head is followed by a fully-connected layer, an LSTM core, and another pair of fully-connected
layers to output the action distribution and the baseline. This architecture is referred to as simplified (see Figure A.1), in
contrast to the full architecture used in Battle, Deathmatch, and Duel experiments, that contains additional observation and
action spaces. We used the simplified architecture to benchmark throughput in Atari, VizDoom, and DMLab.
Note that in our large-scale VizDoom experiments with the full model we chose to use GRU RNN cells (Cho et al., 2014)
instead of LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). Empirically we find that GRU cells exhibit similar sample efficiency
to LSTM cells and require slightly less computation.

µ(at |xt , ht )
ht

V π (xt , ht )

LSTM 512

µ1 , ..., µL
ht+1

ht

V π (xt , ht )

GRU 512

ReLU

ReLU

FC 512

FC 512

ht+1

ReLU

ReLU

ReLU

Conv2D 3 × 3, stride 2

Conv2D 3 × 3, stride 2

FC 128

128 filters

128 filters

ReLU

ReLU

ReLU

Conv2D 4 × 4, stride 2

Conv2D 4 × 4, stride 2

FC 128

64 filters
ReLU

64 filters
game info
23 × 1

ReLU

Conv2D 8 × 8, stride 4

Conv2D 8 × 8, stride 4

32 filters

32 filters

/255

/255

128 × 72 × 3

128 × 72 × 3

Figure A.1. Neural network architectures used in VizDoom experiments. Left: simplified architecture used for performance measurements
and standard VizDoom environments. Right: full architecture with additional low-dimensional game information input (health, armor,
ammunition, etc.) and L independent action heads.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

A.1.4. B ENCHMARKING RESULTS
We provide benchmarking results in the tabular form (see Table A.2). Data points are omitted for configurations that
could not be initialized due to lack of resources, such as memory, simultaneously open file descriptors, or active parallel
threads. Since Sample Factory allocates a very minimal amount of resources per environment instance, we were able to test
configurations running as many as 3000 environments on a single machine for VizDoom and Atari, although increasing
number of environments further provides diminishing returns.
Table A.3 shows performance figures for SampleFactory in some additional scenarios. As mentioned in the main paper,
using GPU for rendering DeepMind Lab environments can improve performance, especially on systems with fewer CPU
cores (e.g. System #1).
Finally, we show performance figures for population-based training scenarios. Here we use 4 GPUs to accelerate learners
and policy workers associated with up to 12 agents trained in parallel. Performance figures show that there is a very small
penalty for increasing the population size, despite the fact that the amount of communication required grows significantly
(e.g. rollout workers have to send observations to many different policy workers associated with different agents). The
measurements in the table show the performance only for single-player environments. Multiplayer environments that involve
actual network communication between individual game instances are significantly slower, up to 2-3 times, depending on the
number of communicating instances. Significant performance gains are possible through replacing network communication
between game instances with faster local mechanism, although this could require significant modifications to the VizDoom
engine and lies beyond the scope of this project.
System 1 (10xCPU, 1xGPU)
Atari 84x84x4
# of envs sampled:

20

40

80

160

VizDoom 128x72 RGB
320

640

DeepMind IMPALA
SeedRL IMPALA
RLLib IMPALA
rlpyt PPO

6350 6470 6709 6880
11347 15734 20715 24906 26149
10808 13596 17744 20236 21192
13312 17764 21772 27240 31408

SampleFactory APPO

17544 25307 35287 42113 46169

20

40

80

DmLab 96x72 RGB

160

320

640

20

40

18232
35272

6615 6776 7041 6669
11443 14537 19705 22059
10676 12556 12472 13444
16268 23688 26448 31660

22733
11500
38908

11868
41940

6179 5943 6133 6448
6747 10293 11262 11191 10604
7736 9224 9948 11644 11516
9028 10852 11376 11560 12280 12400

80

160

320

640

48016

16985 24809 37300 47913

55772

59525

8183 11792 12903 13040 13869 14746

System 2 (36xCPU, 1xGPU)
Atari 84x84x4
# of envs sampled:

72

144

288

576

VizDoom 128x72 RGB
1152

1728

DeepMind IMPALA
SeedRL IMPALA
RLLib IMPALA
rlpyt PPO

9661 8826 8602
25400 33425 39500 39726
19148 20960 20440 19328 19360
24520 33544 39920 53112 63984

22440
68880

SampleFactory APPO

37061 59610 81247 95555 120355 135893

72

144

288

DmLab 96x72 RGB

576

1152

1728

10708 10043 9990
23395 29591 34428
11471 11361 12144 11974
37848 40040 57792 68644

12098
71080

12391
73544

8782 8622 8491
22814 30354 32149 34773
12536 13084 13932
22700 24140 29180 29424 32652 32948

72

144

288

576

1152

1728

38955 61223 79857 103658 131571 146551

26421 37088 41781 42149 41383 41784

Table A.2. Throughput of asynchronous RL methods measured in environment frames per second (samples per second ×4).

Hardware

Training scenario

Rollout workers

Total number of envs

System #1
System #1

DMLab with GPU rendering
DMLab with GPU rendering

20
20

160
320

Throughput, env. frames/sec
17952
18243

System #3
System #3
System #3

VizDoom Battle PBT, full model, 4 agents
VizDoom Battle PBT, full model, 8 agents
VizDoom Battle PBT, full model, 12 agents

72
72
72

2304
2304
2304

153602
154081
146443

Table A.3. Performance of Sample Factory in additional training scenarios.

A.2. DMLab-30 experiment
In this section we share our findings related to multi-task training on DMLab-30. Overall, we largely follow the same
training procedure as the original IMPALA implementation, e.g. we used the exact same model based on ResNet backbone.
We found however that seemingly subtle implementation details can significantly influence the learning performance.
One of the key choices when training on a multi-task benchmark like DMLab-30 with an asynchronous RL algorithm is

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

whether to give different tasks the same amount of samples, or the same amount of compute. We follow (Espeholt et al.,
2018) and employ the second strategy. Just like the original implementation of IMPALA, we spawn an equal number of
workers for every task (in our case 90 workers on a 36-core system, 3 workers per task) and let the OS schedule these
processes. Note that this gives somewhat unfair advantage to tasks which render faster, since with the same amount of CPU
time more samples can be generated for the faster environments. Sample Factory supports both training regimes, but we
decided to go with the IMPALA strategy to ensure fair comparison of scores. Also, the throughput is higher in this mode.
The authors argue that this implementation detail (distribution of compute resources across tasks) should be stated explicitly
whenever different multi-task algorithms are compared.
The only significant difference compared to the original IMPALA setup is the chosen action space. We decided to use a
slightly different discretization of the game inputs introduced in (Hessel et al., 2019), since it makes the action space closer
to the one available to humans, e.g. it allows the agent to turn and move forward within the same frame. The increased
number of actions, however, makes exploration harder, and we see a drop in performance in some of the levels where
exploration is key. Figure A.2 shows the full breakdown of the agent’s performance on individual tasks.
Finally, we noticed that one of the most significant factors affecting the throughput is the level generation at the episode
boundary. To make the DMLab-30 benchmark more accessible we release a dataset of pre-generated levels, as well as the
environment wrapper that makes it easy to use the dataset with any RL algorithm implementation. This wrapper builds on
top of the already existing DMLab level cache. Without relying on the random seed provided by the environment, it will
load the levels from the dataset until all of them are used in the training session, after which new levels will be generated
and added to the cache. Follow the link below to find instructions on how to download the dataset and use it with Sample
Factory: https://github.com/alex-petrenko/sample-factory#dmlab-level-cache.
A.3. VizDoom experiments
We used full neural network architecture (as shown on Figure A.1) to train our final VizDoom agents. All advanced VizDoom
environments we used (Battle, Battle2, Deathmatch, Duel) included an additional observation space with game information
in numerical form. We only used information available to a human player through in-game UI. This includes: health and
armor, current score, number of players in a match, selected weapon index, possession of different types of weapons, and
amount of ammunition available for each weapon. We do not use previous rewards as a policy input, because the reward
function can be based on hidden in-game information (e.g. damage dealt) and thus may give the agent an unfair advantage at
test time.
Table A.4 describes the action space used in VizDoom experiments. We decompose the set of possible actions into seven
independent action distributions, which allows the agent to combine multiple actions within the same frame, e.g. run forward,
strafe, and attack at the same time. The action space for horizontal aim is technically continuous although in this work we
discretize it with 1.25◦ step, which empirically leads to faster learning.
Action head

Number of actions

Moving
Strafing
Attacking
Sprinting
Object interaction
Weapon selection
Horizontal aim

3
3
2
2
2
8
21

Total number of possible actions

Comment
no-action / forward / backward
no-action / left / right
no-action / attack
no-action / sprint
no-action / interact
no-action / select weapon slot 1..7
no-action / turning between −12.5◦ and 12.5◦ in 1.25◦ steps

12096

Table A.4. Action space used in VizDoom multi-agent experiments.

Reward function for Battle and Battle2 is based on the game score (+1 for killing a monster) plus a small additional reward
for collecting health and ammo packs. In Deathmatch and Duel we extended the reward function to include penalties for
dying, as well as additional rewards for picking up new types of weapons and dealing damage to opponents. Finally, we
penalize the agent for switching the weapons too often, which accelerates the training in early stages.
The basic hyperparameters of all our experiments are presented in Table A.5. We deviate from these parameters only in
Deathmatch and Duel experiments where we used action repeat (frameskip) of two consecutive frames instead of four.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Consequently, we adjusted the discount factor to 0.995 to account for this change. We observe that in these environments
repeating actions fewer times led to better final performance of the agents.
In all hardware setups we used the number of rollout workers equal to the number of CPU cores. This allows us to use
CPU affinity setting for processes to minimize the amount of context switching and accelerate sampling. The number of
environments per core that enables the highest throughput lies between 24 and 25 for VizDoom. Note that for systems with
large number of CPU cores a larger batch size might be required to reduce the policy lag. In all our experiments the policy
lag was on average between 5 and 10 SGD steps, which results in stable training. Tensorboard summaries were used to
monitor the policy lag during training.
Learning rate
Action repeat (frameskip)
Framestack
Discount γ
Optimizer
Optimizer settings
Gradient norm clipping

10−4
2/4
No
0.995/0.99
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999,  = 10−6
4.0

Rollout length T
Batch size, samples
Number of training epochs

32
2048
1

V-trace parameters
PPO clipping range

ρ̄ = c̄ = 1
[1.1−1 , 1.1]

Entropy coefficient
Critic loss coefficient

0.003
0.5

Table A.5. Hyperparameters for VizDoom experiments.

A.3.1. P OPULATION - BASED TRAINING
In our VizDoom population-based training experiments we used System #3 to train a population of 8 agents in parallel. The
full configuration of Sample Factory in this setup includes 72 rollout workers (one worker per logical core), 32 environment
instances per rollout worker, 8 policy workers, and 8 learners (one for every policy involved). We deployed 2 learners and 2
policy workers on each available GPU with more GPU memory to spare.
Every 5M frames during training we randomly mutate hyperparameters and reward shaping weights of the bottom 70% of
the population. The mutation rate is 15% for each hyperparameter. In our experiments we mutated learning rate, entropy
loss coefficient, Adam β1 , and individual reward shaping coefficients by increasing or decreasing these parameters by a
factor of 1.2. Additionally, every 5M frames we replace the policy weights for the worst 30% of agents with weights of the
policy randomly sampled from the best 30%. In Duel experiment we introduce an additional threshold that prevents the
weights exchange mechanism if policies are relatively close in performance (the difference in win rate is less than 0.35),
which helps to increase the diversity of the population.

B. Additional performance considerations
Seemingly small details can make a big difference in the performance of an asynchronous system. We found that tuning
CPU core affinity and priority for various components of the system can give us a substantial performance gain. In Sample
Factory we recommend setting the number of rollout workers to the number of logical CPU cores. In this case we can use
processor affinity to run these worker processes on individual cores, preventing a lot of unnecessary context switching.
We also found that in most configurations it helps to deprioritize rollout workers and let policy workers and learners to be
scheduled as soon as there is any work available. This helps saturate the rollout workers with actions and increases the
overall performance. Sample Factory comes with a default set of priorities/affinities that will work well for many training
configurations.
In the highest throughput configurations batching of trajectories into minibatches and transferring them to the GPU can also
become a bottleneck. Similar to (Espeholt et al., 2018) and (Espeholt et al., 2019) we implement this preprocessing step in
the background thread on the learner, eliminating this particular performance issue.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

B.1. FIFO queues
Sample Factory generally avoids explicit data transfer between system components, instead these components exchange
addresses in shared memory buffers. Perhaps rather surprisingly, we found that at frame rates above 105 FPS even
communicating these addresses can be difficult. In fact, at this speed the standard Python’s multiprocessing.Queue tends to
occupy a significant portion of CPU time.
To solve this issue we implemented our own version of the IPC FIFO queue in C++, based on a circular buffer and POSIX
mutexes. This custom implementation is a drop-in replacement for the standard multiprocessing.Queue and it allows for
20-30 times faster message exchange in many producers - few consumers configuration, also achieving lower latency. The
URL below contains installation instructions and detailed performance measurements:
https://github.com/alex-petrenko/faster-fifo

References
Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gülçehre, Ç., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., and Bengio, Y. Learning phrase
representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. In EMNLP, 2014.
Espeholt, L., Soyer, H., Munos, R., Simonyan, K., Mnih, V., Ward, T., Doron, Y., Firoiu, V., Harley, T., Dunning, I., Legg,
S., and Kavukcuoglu, K. IMPALA: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In
ICML, 2018.
Espeholt, L., Marinier, R., Stanczyk, P., Wang, K., and Michalski, M. SEED RL: Scalable and efficient deep-rl with
accelerated central inference. CoRR, abs/1910.06591, 2019.
Hessel, M., Soyer, H., Espeholt, L., Czarnecki, W., Schmitt, S., and van Hasselt, H. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning
with popart. In AAAI, 2019.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 1997.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T. P., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous
methods for deep reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2016.

Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Sample Factory

DeepMind IMPALA

language_select_described_object
explore_goal_locations_small
explore_obstructed_goals_small
language_answer_quantitative_question
explore_object_locations_small
psychlab_visual_search
rooms_collect_good_objects_train
language_select_located_object
explore_object_locations_large
explore_goal_locations_large
psychlab_sequential_comparison
explore_obstructed_goals_large
natlab_varying_map_randomized
natlab_varying_map_regrowth
explore_object_rewards_many
explore_object_rewards_few
psychlab_continuous_recognition
psychlab_arbitrary_visuomotor_mapping
rooms_select_nonmatching_object
skymaze_irreversible_path_varied
rooms_keys_doors_puzzle
rooms_exploit_deferred_effects_train
rooms_watermaze
skymaze_irreversible_path_hard
natlab_fixed_large_map
language_execute_random_task
lasertag_one_opponent_small
lasertag_three_opponents_small
lasertag_three_opponents_large
lasertag_one_opponent_large
0

20

40

60

80
100
Human Normalised Score, %

120

Figure A.2. Final human-normalized training scores for individual DMLab-30 environments.

140

160

