Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
HIERARCHICAL KICKSTARTING FOR SKILL TRANSFER IN
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Michael Matthews1 Mikayel Samvelyan1,2 Jack Parker-Holder3 Edward Grefenstette1 Tim Rockt ¨aschel1
1University College London 2Meta AI 3University of Oxford
michael@mtmatthews.com
ABSTRACT
Practising and honing skills forms a fundamental component of how humans learn, yet artiﬁcial
agents are rarely speciﬁcally trained to perform them. Instead, they are usually trained end-to-end,
with the hope being that useful skills will be implicitly learned in order to maximise discounted
return of some extrinsic reward function. In this paper, we investigate how skills can be incorpo-
rated into the training of reinforcement learning (RL) agents in complex environments with large
state-action spaces and sparse rewards. To this end, we created SkillHack, a benchmark of tasks
and associated skills based on the game of NetHack. We evaluate a number of baselines on this
benchmark, as well as our own novel skill-based method Hierarchical Kickstarting (HKS), which
is shown to outperform all other evaluated methods. Our experiments show that learning with a
prior knowledge of useful skills can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of agents on complex
problems. We ultimately argue that utilising predeﬁned skills provides a useful inductive bias for
RL problems, especially those with large state-action spaces and sparse rewards.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The acquisition and execution of skills form a fundamental component of how humans learn. Consider learning to
play the game of football. Rather than learning by simply playing successive matches, large parts of training would
be commonly devoted to developing speciﬁc skills, such as passing, shooting, footwork, and general ﬁtness. Since
humans seem to beneﬁt from explicitly breaking down a complex task into constituent skills, we hypothesise that
reinforcement learning (RL) agents can beneﬁt from doing the same.
Most existing methods that incorporate some form of skill-based learning do so by learning the skills during training,
simultaneously with the policy that makes use of these skills (Bacon et al., 2016; Frans et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al.,
2017). These two layers of learning often result in instability, although recent approaches have shown success in
limiting this (Nachum et al., 2018; Levy et al., 2019).
In this work, we narrow our focus and consider only the problem of learning with the aid of predeﬁned skills. Speciﬁ-
cally, we assume access to a set of expert policies, one for each skill we have deﬁned. These experts could be obtained
automatically by performing some search for diverse policies (Lehman & Stanley, 2008; Eysenbach et al., 2018;
Parker-Holder et al., 2020), be hand coded with some heuristic policy, or be trained with RL on a set of skill-speciﬁc
environments to a level that is deemed sufﬁcient, which is the approach taken in this paper.
The manifestation of this is SkillHack, 1 a new benchmark for skill-based learning using the MiniHack (Samvelyan
et al., 2021) framework. The benchmark consists of 8 unique task environments, each of which has an associated set
of skill acquisition environments for mastering the individual skills necessary for completing each task. The tasks
are designed to be of a difﬁculty such that not utilising the relevant skill environments makes them very hard to
solve. Completing the suite of tasks requires a broad range of skills in the NetHack environment (Kuttler et al., 2020)
including navigation, combat and manipulation of in-game items. The large space of items, as well as actions for
manipulating them, results in a state-action space that is difﬁcult to explore under a random exploration regime. The
range of unique and diverse skills in NetHack, combined with its speed and ease of use, make SkillHack a convenient
benchmark for studying policy transfer in RL, as well as problems such as continual learning and unsupervised RL.
To evaluate SkillHack, we propose Hierarchical Kickstarting (HKS), a new policy transfer approach which distills
knowledge acquired from expert policies trained on the skill acquisition environments. We refer to these expert
1Code available at https://github.com/ucl-dark/skillhack
1
arXiv:2207.11584v2  [cs.LG]  15 Aug 2022
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Figure 1: SEA MONSTERS task. The agent must reach the staircase on the opposite bank without dying to the monsters
in the lake. To do this it must use of the powerful suit of armour that has spawned on the near bank. The agent can
most easily learn to complete this task by transferring knowledge gained from its associated skill environments.
(a) TakeOff: The agent must take
off the clothes it starts with by press-
ing Shift + t .
(b) PickUp: The agent must navi-
gate to the item and pick it up with
, .
(c) NavigateWater: The agent
must reach the staircase, receiving a
reward penalty every time it tries to
walk into the water.
Figure 2: Some of the skill environments for the skills associated with the SEA MONSTERS task.
policies as teachers. HKS learns a policy-over-teachers πH, which outputs a weighting for each teacher at every
timestep. These are then used to calculate a weighted average of the action distribution of the teachers. The agent
policyπ then incurs a loss proportional to the divergence of its own action distribution from this weighted average.
This incentivises the agent to behave more similarly to highly weighted teachers, potentially accelerating learning by
nudging the agent to behave more similarly to a useful policy. Simultaneously, the policy-over-teachers is incentivised
to pick teachers that match the agent. After a burn-in time, these two networks should be in sync, with the policy-over-
teachers recommending useful teachers based on the current state of the agent, while the agent behaves similarly to the
chosen teachers. This method can be considered as a more generalised version of Kickstarting (Schmitt et al., 2018),
where we add the networkπH so that different skills can be prioritised for knowledge transfer at different points within
an episode.
We perform an empirical evaluation of HKS as well as several baselines across all SkillHack environments. Our results
show that learning with a prior knowledge of useful skills can signiﬁcantly improve performance of agents on complex
problems. We demonstrate that while HKS outperforms other baselines on the overall suite of SkillHack tasks, there
is still signiﬁcant room for methods to improve.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: (i) we present SkillHack, a new benchmark for skill transfer
in RL, (ii) we propose HKS, a new method for policy transfer based on skill speciﬁc expert policies, (iii) we provide
an evaluation and discussion of HKS and several other baseline methods on the SkillHack benchmark.
2 B ACKGROUND
2.1 R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING
We use the standard formalism of Markov Decision Process (MDP) deﬁned as a tuple M =⟨S,A,T,R,γ⟩ repre-
senting state spaceS, action spaceA, transition probabilityT :S×A− →P(S), reward functionR :S×A− →R,
and discount factorγ. The agent chooses actions according to a stochastic policyπ :S− →P(S) in order to maximise
expected episodic reward, deﬁned asE
[∑T
t=0γtrt
]
whereT is the ﬁnal timestep andrt is reward at timestept. The
value function of policyπ is deﬁned asvπ(s) = Eπ
[ ∑T
t=0γtrt|st =s
]
. Model-free approaches to RL aim to learn
2
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
the optimal policy without explicitly learning the dynamics of the environment. Actor-critic algorithms (Konda &
Tsitsiklis, 2000) make use of both a policy (actor) for control and an estimated value function (critic) for updating the
policy of the agent. IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) scales up actor-critic to work with multiple actors, each interact-
ing with their own environment. These actors then periodically send trajectories of experience to a centralised learner,
which then updates the policy and communicates back to the actors. Since the policy of the actors will lag behind that
of the centralised learner, the update uses V-trace, an off-policy corrected target value.
2.2 P OLICY TRANSFER
Training RL agents from scratch can often be prohibitively expensive and time-consuming, while making use of
existing knowledge can improve sample efﬁciency and training speed. Policy transfer approaches aim to assist the
learning process of the agent by utilizing pretrained policies on related tasks. We refer to the policy designed for the
target task MT as the student, which can leverage knowledge from teacher policiesπE1,πE2,...,π EK trained on a
set of source domainsM1,M2,..., MK, respectively.
The Options Framework One way to perform policy transfer is to use options (Sutton et al., 1999), a Hierarchi-
cal Reinforcement Learning (HRL) framework that introduces temporally-extended actions that can span multiple
timesteps. An optionω is a 3-tuple⟨I,π,β⟩ representing the states the option can be initiated from, the option policy
and the option termination function. In a given state s, a policy-over-options selects an option πω for whichs∈I ω.
Control over actions is then ceded to this option for a number of timesteps. Once the termination condition βω is
stochastically met, the option ﬁnishes and cedes control back to the policy-over-options, which then selects a new
option to execute.
Kickstarting RL Kickstarting (Schmitt et al., 2018) is a policy transfer method that uses one or more expert teachers
to guide a student policy. Multi-teacher Kickstarting works by adding an auxiliary loss to the student during training,
deﬁned aslkick =H(∑
kλkπk(·|st)∥π(·|st)), whereH(·∥· ) is cross-entropy,πk are the teacher policies, π is the
student policy and λk are the per-teacher Kickstarting coefﬁcients. This means that the agent not only optimises
for extrinsic reward, but is also incentivised to behave similarly to the teachers. The λk can be varied over training
(although remain constant within an episode) either with Population-Based Training (Jaderberg et al., 2017) or with a
manual schedule.
2.3 N ETHACK
The NetHack Learning Environment (Kuttler et al., 2020) is an RL environment based off the classic game ofNetHack.
NetHack is a dungeon crawler game, notorious for its difﬁculty, where the player must work their way through dozens
of procedurally generated levels, with hundreds of unique enemies and objects. The game is turn based and stochastic,
with a large action space. MiniHack (Samvelyan et al., 2021) is an extension of the NetHack Learning environment
that allows for customisation of levels, rewards and termination conditions, while retaining access to the full set of
entities and environment dynamics from NetHack.
3 S KILL HACK: A BENCHMARK FOR SKILL TRANSFER
To serve as a benchmark for skill transfer we developed SkillHack: a set of procedurally generated MiniHack envi-
ronments containing 8 task environments and 16 skill acquisition environments. The task environments are designed
to be tricky to solve with vanilla RL, due to the large state-action space and sparse rewards. For this reason, each
task environment has an associated set of relevant skill environments. By transferring knowledge gained from solving
these skill environments, the task environment will become easier to solve.
Each task environment is set up such that the agent receives a +1 reward for successfully completing the task and a
−1 reward for failing the task and/or dying. The skill environments are set up with bespoke rewards2 to encourage an
RL agent to learn the skill quickly and in a generalised manner.
A motivating example is the SEA MONSTERS task (Figure 1). In this task, the agent is faced with a narrow, procedu-
rally generated bridge over a monster infested lake, with the goal to reach the staircase on the opposite bank. If the
agent simply walks over the bridge, it will be killed by one of the monsters before it reaches the other side. However,
on the near side of the lake a powerful piece of armour will be randomly generated and placed on the ﬂoor. The agent
2Most of the skill environments simply have +1 reward for completing the skill. More complicated skills, for instanceUnlock,
require an exact sequence of key presses. These environments have additional rewards for getting part way through the sequence.
3
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Table 1: Summary of SkillHack tasks. Different styles are used to differentiate T ASKS , Skills and
Items/Entities.
Task Description
BATTLE PickUp a randomly placed Sword, Wield the Sword and ﬁnallyFight and kill a
Monster.
PREPARE FOR BATTLE PickUp a ration of Food and a piece of Armour. Wear the Armour and Eat the
Food.
TARGET PRACTICE Either a set of Daggers or a Wand of Death will spawn on the ﬂoor. PickUp
the item and either ZapWandOfDeath or Throw the Daggers in order to kill the
Minotaur.
MEDUSA PickUp and then PutOn the Towel that is placed in your starting room, thus blind-
folding yourself. Open the door to the second room where Medusa is caged, but can
still instantly kill you with her deadly gaze should you enter with your vision intact.
You must NavigateBlind in this second room in order to ﬁnd the stairway out.
SEA MONSTERS TakeOff your starting Armour and then PickUp and Wear the strong suit of
Armour that spawns on the near bank of the lake. Whilst wearing this Armour
you can NavigateWater across the bridge without dying to the Piranhas. Make
it to the other side and reach the staircase to complete the task.
FROZEN LAVA CROSS Either a Wand of Cold or a Frost Horn will spawn on the near side of a
river of lava. PickUp the item and then create a bridge across the lava with either
ZapWandOfCold or by ApplyFrostHorn. Finally, NavigateLava across your
newly made bridge to reach the staircase on the other side.
IDENTIFY MIMIC Mimics are monsters that can camouﬂage themselves. This task generates 3
Statues, 2 of which are real and one of which is actually a Mimic that you must
safely identify. To do this you can PickUp a stack of Daggers and Throw them at
the Statues. Hitting the Mimic will reveal it and complete the task. Alternatively
you can NavigateLavaToAmulet by following the bridge across the lava lake and
then PickUp and PutOn the Amulet of ESP which will reveal the Mimic. Re-
vealing the Mimic in an unsafe way, for instance by walking into it, will cause you to
fail the task.
A LOCKED DOOR PickUp the Skeleton Key and use it to unlock the Door, before proceeding to
NavigateLava to the exit.
must Take Off the clothes it starts off wearing, Pick Up and then Wear the armour, before ﬁnallyNavigating
Water to reach the staircase on the other side of the lake.
The four skills associated with the task each have their own respective environments (Figure 2), in which skill-speciﬁc
teacher agents can learn expert policies. The environments are all procedurally generated, with distractions in the form
of random terrain and entities, in order to prevent overﬁtting (Cobbe et al., 2020). As well as providing reward and
termination when the skill is successfully performed, a constant negative reward is applied every timestep in order to
encourage the agent to perform the skill as fast as possible.
It should be noted that these task and skill acquisition environments only form a fraction of the possible behaviours
in NetHack. However, the primary aim of SkillHack is not necessarily to directly lead to a more competent NetHack
agent, but to facilitate research into skill transfer.
The full list of tasks is summarised in Table 1. More information on the skill acquisition and task environments can be
found in appendices C and D respectively.
4 H IERARCHICAL KICKSTARTING
In this section, we propose Hierarchical Kickstarting (HKS), a new approach for policy transfer that combines the
strengths of two other policy transfer approaches: Kickstarting and the Options Framework.
4
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
To perform policy transfer from multiple teachers, HKS utilises a hierarchical policy network πH which at every
timestep weights the relevance of each teacherπk based on the current state. Rather than ceding control to one of the
teacher policiesπk as in the Options Framework, this weighting is used to calculate a weighted average of the teacher
action distributions. We then formulate an additional loss, proportional to the cross-entropy of this weighted average
with the agent action distribution. The policy-over-teachers πH therefore does not directly affect the action selection
but only the loss incurred by the agent. As a result, the student π is optimised to behave similarly to the average of
the teachers πk as weighted by πH, as well as maximising external rewards. Conversely, πH is optimised to choose
teachers that match the behaviour ofπ, forming a cyclic relationship between the two levels of policies.
The additional auxiliary loss of the student policy in HKS is computed as follows:
lHKS =λH
(∑
k
πH (k|st)πk(·|st)
π(·|st)
)
, (1)
here the outputs ofπH are passed through a softmax function.
HKS can be seen as a combination of Kickstarting and the Options Framework. It generalises Kickstarting by using a
hierarchical policy-over-teachers which adjusts how much to kickstart from each teacher at each timestep, rather than
distilling a ﬁxed amount from each teacher. Since skills often have to be performed sequentially to complete a task, it
is common for only a single skill to be immediately relevant at a given point in time, making this a useful ability.
Furthermore, HKS also addresses the weakness of the Options Framework. Pretrained options are effective when the
environment dynamics of the target domain matches those used during the training of the option. However, options
can be highly unstable when executed directly on a target task which is meaningfully different from the environment
encountered during training.
5 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
All experiments are run with the IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) framework, using the open-source TorchBeast
implementation (K ¨uttler et al., 2019). The agent architecture is an adapted version of the one used in Kuttler et al.
(2020) and Samvelyan et al. (2021).
The inputs to the network include the full matrix of glyphs that serve as the main screen of the game, along with
an encoding of the most recently received in-game message (“ You hit the orc!”), the players inventory and a set of
relevant statistics (health, armour level, etc.). The network uses CNNs for the spatial inputs, as well as LSTM units
to incorporate memory. The action space consists of 32 actions (16 movement actions and 16 command actions). For
the full action space see Appendix A and for a full listing of hyperparameters see Appendix F. For more detail on the
observation space and network architecture see Kuttler et al. (2020) and Samvelyan et al. (2021).
An expert teacher policy is produced via vanilla RL for each of the 16 skill environments. The results of training the
experts can be seen in Appendix E. We train vanilla RL, Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2018), the
Options Framework, Kickstarting and HKS on all 8 tasks for2× 108 timesteps, repeated over at least 3 random seeds.
For the 3 skill-based methods, only teachers relevant to the target task are used.
5.1 B ASELINES
Options Framework We use the pretrained experts as options with frozen weights, while training a policy-over-
options network to direct them. The option networks have their LSTM units removed (although these are kept in the
policy-over-options). We consider a degenerate form of the Options Framework where options can be initialised from
any state and always terminate in one stepIω =S,β(·)ω = 1.
Kickstarting For the Kickstarting agent, we use the experts as teachers and similarly remove the LSTMs. We keep
all λk equal and therefore refer to them all as λ = λk. The schedule for λ was manually set to start at λ = 10
and linearly decay to λ = 1 after 107 timesteps. Retaining a small Kickstarting coefﬁcient was found to increase the
stability of the method, whereas ifλ was allowed to decay to 0 there would be occasional massive drops in performance
(Appendix B).
Hierarchical Kickstarting The LSTM removal and λ schedule are the same as for Kickstarting. The policy-over-
teachers was implemented as an extra head on the student network in the form of an additional single fully connected
layer with softmax activations. Preliminary testing of the method found that it would often quickly get stuck in
5
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
local minima where the policy-over-teachers would always weight the same teacher very highly, resulting in poor
performance. To mitigate this, an additional loss was added proportional to the negative entropy of the policy-over-
teacherslE =−κH(πH ). This encourages the policy-over-teachers to give a more uniform distribution, preventing it
from falling into the described local minima. The coefﬁcientκ was set with a manual schedule, starting atκ = 20 and
linearly decaying toκ = 0 after 2× 107 timesteps.
Vanilla RL and RND did not require any additional changes.
6 R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.1 R ESULTS
Figure 3: Mean success rate of baselines across all Skill-
Hack tasks. The shaded area denotes 1 standard error.
Figure 3 plots the success rate of the 4 methods averaged
over all 8 of the SkillHack tasks. The complete lack of
progress by vanilla RL, in contrast to the progress by the
3 skill-based methods, shows that the SkillHack tasks
are suitably designed to be a useful benchmark for pol-
icy transfer. HKS performs best in terms of ﬁnal perfor-
mance, achieving 56% success rate, as opposed to 41%
and 32% for Kickstarting and the Options Framework,
respectively. It does however take marginally longer
than the other methods to converge. HKS overtakes the
Options Framework and Kickstarting in success rate at
around 2× 107 and 3× 107 timesteps respectively. For
a fair comparison against HKS, the Kickstarting score
was increased by around 2% for reasons discussed in
Appendix B.
Figure 4 splits out the results for each of the SkillHack tasks, painting a more nuanced picture of the results. There are
some environments where only a subset of the skill-based methods managed to achieve any signiﬁcant performance,
namely A L OCKED DOOR (HKS), TARGET PRACTICE (Options Framework) and M EDUSA (Kickstarting & HKS).
In terms of the ﬁnal success rate, HKS always at least equals Kickstarting, although notably loses to the Options
Framework on T ARGET PRACTICE . Interestingly, the only two tasks where the Options Framework outperforms
Kickstarting (T ARGET PRACTICE & F ROZEN LAVA CROSS ) are the only two tasks that cannot always be solved
using the same method for each episode. Both tasks need to be solved differently depending on a random object
spawned at the start of the episode (See Table 1). The S EA MONSTERS task was the only one to remain unsolved by
all 4 methods, making it a good candidate for future research into skill-based methods.
6.2 M ISMATCHED SKILLS
So far we have only considered the case where the provided skills exactly match those of the task. In practice, it would
likely be a common situation that the skills do not perfectly correspond to the task at hand. To investigate this, we look
at how the skill based algorithms perform in two situations: adding a useless skill and removing a useful skill. The
results are shown in Figure 5.
The Options Framework performs only marginally worse when given an additional skill, compared to a perfect skill
set, which makes sense as it has to navigate a slightly larger action space. It performs signiﬁcantly worse when a
skill is missing, since this fundamentally limits its capability, as it cannot learn new behaviours. Surprisingly, both
Kickstarting and HKS actually perform better when a skill is missing compared to when an useless skill is added
(note that we may expect the result to be different for Kickstarting if PBT was implemented). We hypothesise that
the reason for this is that the remaining skills already give a strong enough prior on exploration, while the existence
of an additional skill effectively dilutes this prior. Interestingly, this implies that more focus should be put on making
sure all skills in the skill set are relevant, rather than developing a skill set that covers all possibly useful behaviour. In
practical terms, this may mean developing a small core set of skills that exhibit known essential behaviour.
6.3 Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF HKS
In order to further scrutinise HKS, we can observe how the distributions of the policy-over-teachers change during
an episode for the converged policies (Figure 6). Note again that the policy-over-teachers does not affect the agents
6
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Figure 4: Success rate for all methods on the 8 SkillHack tasks, averaged over the repeats of each experiment. The
shaded area denotes 1 standard error.
Figure 5: Success rate of the 3 skill based methods on 6 of the SkillHack tasks, when either a useless skill has been
added (ﬁrst row) or a useful skill has been removed (second row) from the skill set.
choice of action, but due to the system of losses implemented in HKS, it can be used to identify which skills the agent
is prioritising at each timestep.
Sequential Skill Selection All the given tasks can be solved by executing a set of skills in sequence, so we would
expect to see the policy-over-teachers reﬂect this by prioritising each skill as it becomes relevant. This behaviour is
indeed observed and is most clearly seen in P REPARE FOR BATTLE , A L OCKED DOOR and FROZEN LAVA CROSS ,
while being somewhat present in BATTLE . The more interesting cases are when this behaviour does not occur.
IDENTIFY MIMIC : A Missing Skill While the policy-over-teachers for I DENTIFY MIMIC seems to display the
expected behaviour by successively prioritising different skills, on closer inspection the chosen skills do not match the
task description. Speciﬁcally, the agent prioritises the PutOn skill for the ﬁrst 20 timesteps, long before it reaches
the Amulet of ESP and has any need to PutOn anything. These ﬁrst 20 timesteps are the time when the agent is
navigating past the statues in order to make it to the lava bridge (See Figure 10d). It would appear that the agent is
effectively missing a skillNavigatePastStatues and in order to minimise the HKS loss, the policy-over-teachers
prioritises the existing skill that is most similar to the missing one.
7
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Figure 6: Distribution of policy-over-teachers for converged HKS policies over the span of a single episode. Results
are each taken from a single successful run, smoothed with a rolling average of 6 timesteps. Note that the sampled
FROZEN LAVA CROSS had a Frost Horn spawn. Only the 6 environments in which HKS converged on are shown.
MEDUSA : A Useless Skill MEDUSA also exhibits unexpected behaviour. In the ﬁnal timesteps, at the time when the
agent should be navigating while blindfolded towards the staircase, we see that the policy-over-teachers overwhelm-
ingly prioritises PutOn rather than NavigateBlind. Furthermore, watching the trained agent showed it solved
the environment in the expected way and did not ﬁnd some unexpected alternate solution. Upon further investiga-
tion, we found that NavigateBlind does not properly correspond to the MEDUSA task. Speciﬁcally, the blindness
applied in NavigateBlind uses a Potion of Blindness , which has different mechanics to blindfolding via
PuttingOn a Towel,3 corresponding to a different input observation. This domain shift made NavigateBlind
a useless skill4 and HKS correspondingly learned to disregard it by again prioritising the skill during this time period
that most closely matched the theoretical correct NavigateBlind skill.
6.4 A NALYSIS OF HKS L OSS
Figure 7 shows the HKS loss over time for the experiments that were run with missing and additional skills. Notably,
the HKS loss tends to converge to a non-zero value, indicating that the agent policy would not perfectly match that of
the policy-over-teachers. This implies that the skills policies do not completely correspond to the policies needed in
the task, which was to be expected, as the skill acquisition environments did not perfectly match the task environments.
The HKS loss for the experiments with additional skills tend to converge to a smaller value than those in which a skill
was removed. This is because the greater range of skills provided in these experiments allows the policy-over-teacher
to more accurately match the agent policy. In the cases where skills have been removed, the policy-over-teachers is
again likely substituting in the closest matching skill during the timesteps taken up by the missing skill.
A notable result is seen on the experiment for A L OCKED DOOR with additional skills. As can be seen from the
corresponding success rate plot, this experiment failed to converge. The HKS loss converges at close to 0, implying
that the agent policy has almost perfectly synced with the policy-over-teachers. In the absence of external rewards,
the agent policy will only be shaped by the intrinsic losses and, ignoring other intrinsic losses (the IMPALA agent
does include some other intrinsic losses but these are roughly a magnitude smaller than the HKS loss), this means that
the agent policy will be almost wholly shaped by the HKS loss. Therefore it logically follows that it would learn to
minimise this loss and perfectly match the policy-over-teachers, which is what we see in the plot. What this plot does
not show is whether the skills being chosen by the policy-over-teachers is changing during training on this experiment
or whether they are remaining constant. It seems likely that the case is the latter, as if the agent was changing the skills
it used over time, it would likely eventually reach the correct set of skills and therefore bias the exploration of the
agent towards succeeding on the task. This could be an indication that in the case when the initial exploratory period
fails to ﬁnd any reward, the agent and policy-over-teachers get stuck performing the same set of skills.
3https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Blindness
4A ﬁxed version of this skill is available in the GitHub repository. The authors decided to retain the broken version in this paper
as an illustrative point.
8
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Figure 7: The ﬁrst row shows HKS loss for the 6 SkillHack environments that were run with both missing and
additional skills. The second row shows success rate on these same tasks for reference.
6.5 L IMITATIONS
Despite the relative success of the skill based methods over the vanilla RL baseline, each one fails to learn on at least
two of the SkillHack tasks. As discussed previously, a signiﬁcant reason for this may be that badly designed skills do
not transfer to the desired task, providing no useful prior for exploration. Indeed, a badly designed skill will likely
actually harm exploration, by inducing the agent to explore irrelevant action sequences. This is all to say that these
methods are only as good as the skills that are provided to them, although they have shown some ability to be robust
to missing and useless skills, provided that the rest of the skill set is well crafted. The reliance on predeﬁned skills
can be seen as a fundamental limitation of the skill based methods, as they require domain knowledge of the task to
engineer useful skills or skill acquisition environments. However, if this domain knowledge is present, we believe that
skill based methods provide a practical way to inject this information into an agent.
7 R ELATED WORK
Policy Transfer Policy transfer is deﬁned as the paradigm where the learning process of an agent is supplemented
by utilizing policies pretrained on related tasks. It is a paradigm that becomes more prevalent as environments develop
larger state-action spaces, sparser rewards and more open-ended sets of possible behaviours. Knowledge distillation
is a popular technique in supervised learning that ensembles knowledge from many teacher models into a student
model (Hinton et al., 2015). Recent work in RL has used the distillation of policies to transfer knowledge from teacher
policies to the student. Rusu et al. (2016) propose policy distillation where the student policy is trained by minimising
the divergence between the action distributions of the teacher and student policies over the trajectories sampled via the
teacher policies. Czarnecki et al. (2019) performs policy distillation using the trajectories that are sampled with the
student policy, rather than teachers’. Another objective for policy transfer is minimising the cross-entropy between
the teacher and student policies, as is done in Kickstarting RL (Schmitt et al., 2018). The Actor-Mimic algorithm
(Parisotto et al., 2016) takes a slightly different approach to Kickstarting. First, the student is pretrained to master all
the skill environments, but with the coefﬁcient governing this loss function held constant. The resultant weights are
used to initialise a network that then trains on the target environment, without any supervision from the teachers. A
different perspective for achieving transfer is maximising the probability that the student and teacher policies will visit
the same trajectories. An example of such an approach is Distral (Teh et al., 2017) where a central “distilled” policy
is shared across many tasks in order to capture common behaviour. Each teacher is trained in separation to solve its
own task while being constrained to stay close to the shared policy.
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning While we choose to use the Options Framework as a baseline and as a build-
ing block of HKS, many other HRL approaches exist. Feudal RL (Dayan & Hinton, 1992) formulates an arbitrarily
deep hierarchy of managers. The control hierarchy is such that each manager has a super-manager that sets it tasks and
a set of sub-managers that it delegates tasks to. A recent successful realisation of this framework is FeUdal Networks
(Vezhnevets et al., 2017), in which a manager sets goals in a learned latent space. Hierarchical Deep Q-Networks
(Kulkarni et al., 2016) proposes a hierarchical structure for value based RL. A meta-controller produces a value func-
9
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
tion over goals conditioned on the state, while a controller produces a value function over actions, conditioned on
the state and the chosen goal. A critic checks if the goal is reached and provides intrinsic rewards to the controller,
which terminates either at the end of the episode or when the goal is reached, in which case the meta-controller picks
a new goal. HIRO (Nachum et al., 2018) is another 2 level hierarchical model, but with a focus on off-policy learning.
Off-policy learning in HRL is especially complex, as changes to lower level policies correspond to changing the action
space of higher level policies. The key insight to correct for this was to relabel old goals. Consider a buffer of states,
goals, rewards and actions. To perform off-policy learning on this sequence, the goal is adjusted such that if the model
was run with the current sub-policies, the same action distribution would be induced as in the memory buffer. A
similar model is Hierarchical Actor-Critic (Levy et al., 2019), which additionally makes use of Hindsight Experience
Replay to outperform HIRO.
Benchmarks We consider a range of RL benchmarks and their viability to the problem of skill transfer. Classic
environments such as those in OpenAI gym (Brockman et al., 2016) are too simple to be broken down into constituent
skills. Common video game environments such as Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013), DeepMind Lab (Beattie et al., 2016)
and ViZDoom (Kempka et al., 2016) are complex enough for skill-based learning to be warranted, but much of the
focus of learning in these environments must be put towards interpreting the high dimensional pixel input. The CORA
benchmark (Powers et al., 2021) for continual learning proposes schedules of environments which are each shown to
the agent for some large number of iterations, with one of the primary goals being toforward transfer knowledge from
previously seen environments to new ones. Skill transfer could be seen as a subset of continual learning, where the
focus is entirely on the forward transfer of information from skills to tasks.
The MineRL (Guss et al., 2021) benchmark challenges the RL agent to mine a diamond in the popular video game
Minecraft. Using vanilla RL to do this would be intractable, so the benchmark comes with a dataset of over 60 million
state-action tuples of recorded human demonstrations. It should be noted that while similar to the use of expert teachers
in SkillHack, new samples cannot be dynamically generated from the teachers, meaning this dataset could not be used
by any of the methods we investigate. Crafter (Hafner, 2022) is a 2D open world survival game, with similar game
dynamics to Minecraft but with a lower dimensional input space and faster runtime. The paper formulates a taxonomy
of 22 achievements and their dependencies on each other. By interpreting achievements with dependencies as tasks
and achievements with no dependencies as skills, Crafter could be phrased as a skill transfer benchmark. However,
the majority of the tasks included only have 1 associated skill and many skills have no associated task.
8 C ONCLUSION
This paper presents SkillHack: a NetHack-based benchmark for skill transfer in RL. SkillHack features 16 skill envi-
ronments for acquiring knowledge necessary to solve 8 target problems, all of which have been shown to be intractable
for vanilla RL. Our experimental results show that the SkillHack tasks form a difﬁcult and varied suite of challenges,
with methods performing markedly differently across the range of tasks. We also propose Hierarchical Kickstarting
(HKS): a new method for skill transfer that combines Kickstarting and the Options Framework. Evaluating HKS on
SkillHack shows that it improves the ﬁnal performance on the overall benchmark by 15% over the next best baseline
(Kickstarting).
In the near future, we aim to conduct additional experiments to compare the methods by conditioning on experts for
all 16 skill environments, rather than the subset of relevant experts for each task. We would also like to investigate
extending our baseline for the Options Framework to allow for options to learn during training (Bacon et al., 2016).
Finally, we plan to use SkillHack to study other policy transfer approaches including inter-task mapping, representation
transfer and transfer learning approaches for the framework of unsupervised RL.
We hope that SkillHack can serve as a useful benchmark in the community for evaluating skill transfer and that HKS
can ﬁnd applications where traditional RL methods struggle. We are open sourcing both the SkillHack benchmark and
the HKS method and look forward to contributions from the community.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Yicheng Luo, Minqi Jiang, and Sam Powers for many valuable discussions during the course
of completing this work. Furthermore, we would like to thank our anonymous reviewers for their insightful feedback
and recommendations for improving the paper.
10
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
REFERENCES
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. CoRR, abs/1609.05140, 2016. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05140.
Charles Beattie, Joel Z. Leibo, Denis Teplyashin, Tom Ward, Marcus Wainwright, Heinrich K¨uttler, Andrew Lefrancq,
Simon Green, V´ıctor Vald´es, Amir Sadik, Julian Schrittwieser, Keith Anderson, Sarah York, Max Cant, Adam Cain,
Adrian Bolton, Stephen Gaffney, Helen King, Demis Hassabis, Shane Legg, and Stig Petersen. Deepmind lab, 2016.
M. G. Bellemare, Y . Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform
for general agents. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 47:253–279, Jun 2013. ISSN 1076-9757. doi:
10.1613/jair.3912. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1613/jair.3912.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and Wojciech
Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network distillation, 2018.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12894.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to benchmark
reinforcement learning, 2020.
Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, Siddhant Jayakumar, Grzegorz Swirszcz, and Max Jader-
berg. Distilling policy distillation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Masashi Sugiyama (eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Second International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 89 of Proceedings of Ma-
chine Learning Research, pp. 1331–1340. PMLR, 16–18 Apr 2019.
Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 5, [NIPS Conference] , pp. 271–278, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1992. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
ISBN 1558602747.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, V olodymir Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron, Vlad
Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with
importance weighted actor-learner architectures, 2018.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need: Learning skills
without a reward function, 2018.
Kevin Frans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. Meta learning shared hierarchies. CoRR,
abs/1710.09767, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.09767.
William H. Guss, Mario Ynocente Castro, Sam Devlin, Brandon Houghton, Noboru Sean Kuno, Crissman Loomis,
Stephanie Milani, Sharada Mohanty, Keisuke Nakata, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, John Schulman, Shinya Shiroshita,
Nicholay Topin, Avinash Ummadisingu, and Oriol Vinyals. The minerl 2020 competition on sample efﬁcient
reinforcement learning using human priors, 2021.
Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities, 2022.
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. ArXiv,
abs/1503.02531, 2015.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali Razavi, Oriol Vinyals,
Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Population based
training of neural networks, 2017.
Michał Kempka, Marek Wydmuch, Grzegorz Runc, Jakub Toczek, and Wojciech Ja´skowski. Vizdoom: A doom-based
ai research platform for visual reinforcement learning, 2016.
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. In S. Solla, T. Leen, and K. M¨uller (eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 12. MIT Press, 2000. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/1999/file/6449f44a102fde848669bdd9eb6b76fa-Paper.pdf.
Tejas D. Kulkarni, Karthik R. Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep reinforce-
ment learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation, 2016.
11
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Heinrich K¨uttler, Nantas Nardelli, Thibaut Lavril, Marco Selvatici, Viswanath Sivakumar, Tim Rockt¨aschel, and Ed-
ward Grefenstette. TorchBeast: A PyTorch Platform for Distributed RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03552, 2019.
URL https://github.com/facebookresearch/torchbeast.
Heinrich Kuttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander H. Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward Grefenstette, and
Tim Rockt¨aschel. The nethack learning environment, 2020.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth Stanley. Exploiting open-endedness to solve problems through the search for novelty.
Artiﬁcial Life - ALIFE, 01 2008.
Andrew Levy, G. Konidaris, Robert W. Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies with hindsight. In
ICLR, 2019.
Oﬁr Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efﬁcient hierarchical reinforcement learning, 2018.
Emilio Parisotto, Lei Jimmy Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer reinforcement
learning. In ICLR, 2016.
Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Stephen Roberts. Effective diversity in population-
based reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33. 2020.
Sam Powers, Eliot Xing, Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Abhinav Gupta. Cora: Benchmarks, baselines, and
metrics as a platform for continual reinforcement learning agents, 2021.
Andrei A. Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, C ¸ aglar G¨ulc ¸ehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirkpatrick, Razvan
Pascanu, V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy distillation. InICLR, 2016.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Robert Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Eric Hambro, Fabio Petroni, Hein-
rich Kuttler, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rockt¨aschel. Minihack the planet: A sandbox for open-ended reinforce-
ment learning research, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=skFwlyefkWJ.
Simon Schmitt, Jonathan J. Hudson, Augustin Z´ıdek, Simon Osindero, Carl Doersch, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Joel Z.
Leibo, Heinrich K ¨uttler, Andrew Zisserman, Karen Simonyan, and S. M. Ali Eslami. Kickstarting deep reinforce-
ment learning. CoRR, abs/1803.03835, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03835.
Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for temporal
abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artif. Intell., 112(1–2):181–211, August 1999. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.
1016/S0004-3702(99)00052-1. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(99)00052-1.
Yee Whye Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia Hadsell, Nicolas
Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning, 2017.
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David Silver, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning, 2017.
12
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Name Key
PickUp ,
PutOn Shift + p
Zap z
TakeOff Shift + t
Wear Shift + w
Throw t
Escape Esc
Eat e
Apply a
Wield w
Quaff q
Gold $
Inv1 f
Inv2 g
Inv3 h
Table 2: Command Actions
A A CTION SPACE
NetHack takes ASCII characters as its inputs. These can be modiﬁed with certain keys like Ctrl and Shift . We use a
reduced action space of size 32, only allowing actions that have been deemed relevant for completing the benchmark.
This includes 16 movement actions consisting of the 4 cardinal directions, the 4 diagonal directions each with a single
and long movement option. The remaining actions are summarised in Table 2.
B K ICKSTARTING COEFFICIENT DISCUSSION
The Kickstarting coefﬁcient λ was set with a manual schedule deﬁned in Section 5.1. Notably, we never let the
coefﬁcient drop to 0, but instead specify a minimum value of0.1, meaning that the Kickstarting loss is always present.
The reason for this was twofold. Firstly, we saw that large spikes in performance would often occur after the coefﬁcient
had reached its minimum value of 0.1. Therefore, keeping a small minimum allowed Kickstarting and HKS to work
without going through the lengthy process of tuning the schedule for each environment. Secondly, when the coefﬁcient
was allowed to drop to 0, we would see infrequent massive drops in performance with both Kickstarting and HKS
(Around 1 in 2 runs would at some point lose around half of their performance after converging). The reason for this
is not entirely clear, but is an area of current investigation.
This artiﬁcial minimum on the coefﬁcient effectively imposes a cap on the performance of Kickstarting, as it is always
slightly being optimised away from following extrinsic reward. HKS is not as susceptible to this effect, as the policy-
over-teachers can converge such that the weighted average of teacher action distributions closely matches that which
would maximise extrinsic reward anyway. This can be seen in the plot of model performances (Figure 4) for the tasks
BATTLE , P REPARE FOR BATTLE and I DENTIFY MIMIC . In all of these tasks, HKS converges to a slightly higher
success rate than Kickstarting. To account for this discrepancy, we take the average percentage difference in the ﬁnal
performances of Kickstarting and HKS on these three tasks, which works out to be 2.2%. The ﬁnal performance for
Kickstarting averaged over all tasks is 39.9%. We therefore increase this value by 2.2% giving us 40.8%, giving us a
fairer comparison against HKS.
C S KILL LISTING
The list of skills is shown in Table 3. Each skill has an environment where it is learned in isolation, shown in Figures
8 and 9. It should be noted that many of the environments visually look the same. This is because many environments
focus on manipulating items in the players inventory, with the rest of the world only serving as a distraction which the
agent must learn to reliably ignore.
13
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Name Description
ApplyFrostHorn Use a frost horn to freeze some lava.
Eat Eat an apple.
Fight Hit a monster.
NavigateBlind Reach the staircase while blinded.
NavigateLava Reach the staircase past random lava patches.
NavigateLavaToAmulet Reach an amulet past random lava patches.
NavigateWater Reach the staircase past random water patches.
PickUp Pick up a random item.
PutOn Put on an amulet or towel.
TakeOff Take off clothes.
Throw Throw daggers at a statue or at a monster.
Unlock Use a key to unlock a locked door.
Wear Wear a robe.
Wield Wield a sword.
ZapWandOfCold Use a wand of cold to freeze lava.
ZapWandOfDeath Use a wand of death to kill a monster.
Table 3: Skills contained in the benchmark.
D T ASK LISTING
The task descriptions can be found in Table 1. The environments are shown in Figures 10 and 11.
E F URTHER RESULTS
The experts were all trained on the skill acquisition environments for 7.5× 107 timesteps. The results are shown in
Figure 12.
F H YPERPARAMETERS
The hyperparameters for the IMPALA agent are summarised in Table 4.
14
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
(a) ApplyFrostHorn
 (b) Eat
(c) Fight
 (d) NavigateBlind
(e) NavigateLava
(f) NavigateLavaToAmulet
(g) NavigateWater
 (h) PickUp
Figure 8: Skill environments.
15
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
(a) PutOn
 (b) TakeOff
(c) Throw
 (d) Unlock
(e) Wear
 (f) Wield
(g) ZapWandOfCold
 (h) ZapWandOfDeath
Figure 9: Skill environments (continued).
16
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
(a) FROZEN LAVA CROSS
 (b) BATTLE
(c) MEDUSA
(d) IDENTIFY MIMIC
(e) SEA MONSTERS
Figure 10: Task environments.
17
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
(a) PREPARE FOR BATTLE
(b) A L OCKED DOOR
(c) TARGET PRACTICE
Figure 11: Task environments (continued).
18
Published at 1st Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2022
Figure 12: Success rate for training skill experts on the 16 skill acquisition environments
Name Value
Training Settings
num actors 256
batch size 32
unroll length 80
Model Settings
hidden dim 256
embedding dim 64
glyph type all cat
equalize input dim false
layers 5
crop model cnn
crop dim 9
use index select true
max learner queue size 1024
Loss Settings
entropy cost 0.001
baseline cost 0.5
discounting 0.999
reward clipping none
normalize reward true
Name Value
Optimizer Settings
learning rate 0.0002
grad norm clipping 40
Intrinsic Reward Settings
int.twoheaded true
int.input full
int.intrinsic weight 0.1
int.discounting 0.99
int.baseline cost 0.5
int.episodic true
int.reward clipping none
int.normalize reward true
Table 4: Hyperparameters of the IMPALA agent.
19